Module 14- Rehabilitative Nursing 
 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 1 of 27 
 
Module 14: Rehabilitative Nursing 
Minimum Number of Theory Hours: 2 
Recommended Clinical Hours: 4 
 
Statement of Purpose: 
The purpose of this unit is to introduce the Nurse Assistant to restorative care. Each individual is entitled to reach his/her optimal 
level of functioning. The Nurse Assistant assists the patient/resident in achieving maximum independent living skills through use of 
rehabilitative or restorative procedures. 
 
Terminology: 
 
1. Active-assistive range of motion 17. Eversion 32. Pneumonia 
2. Active range of motion 18. IDT-Interdisciplinary team 33. Pressure ulcers 
3. Activities of daily living (ADL) 19. Heel/elbow protector 34. Prosthesis 
4. Adaptive 20. Fleece pad 35. Quadriplegia 
5. Airbed (Kinair, Clinitron, Hill-Rom) 21. Flotation pads 36. Range of Motion (ROM) 
6. Alternating pressure mattress 22. Foot board 37. Restorative care/rehabilitation 
7. Ambulation 23. Hemiplegia 38. Risk factors 
8. Atrophy 24. Independence 39. Self-care activities 
9. Bed cradle 25. Inversion 40. Stasis pneumonia 
10. Cast 26. Joint 41. Thrombophlebitis 
11. Contractures 27. Open Reduction Internal Fixation 42. Traction 
12. Decline (ORIF) 43. Trochanter rolls 
13. Decubitus 28. Paralysis 44. Turn, cough, deep breathe (TCDB) 
14. Disability 29. Paraplegia 45. Water bed 
15. Egg-crate mattress 30. Passive range of motion 
16. Embolism 31. Phlebitis 
 
 
 
Patient, resident, and client are synonymous terms referring to the person receiving care 
 
 
 

Module 14- Rehabilitative Nursing 
 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 2 of 27 
 
 
Performance Standards (Objectives): 
Upon completion of the two- (2) hours of class plus homework assignments and four (4) hours of clinical experience, the learner will 
be able to: 
1. Define key terminology 
2. Discuss rehabilitation (restorative care) and how it promotes independence and patient/resident potential 
3. State goals of restorative care that promote independence and patient/resident potential 
4. Describe the rehabilitation team, state its purpose, and discuss the role of the Nurse Assistant as a member of the team 
5. List the responsibilities of the Nurse Assistant in promoting patient/resident self-care 
6. List activities that make up Activities of Daily Living (ADLs) 
7. List common comfort and adaptive devices and explain the purposes of each 
8. Identify steps to prevent complications from inactivity 
9. Describe range-of-motion exercises (ROM) 
10. Identify procedures and devices used to promote mobility and ambulation for patients/residents with physical and/or visual impairment 
11. Discuss relationship between patient’s/resident’s self-esteem and family involvement in care 
12. Discuss the process of documentation and the Nurse Assistant role in care plan meeting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References: 

Module 14- Rehabilitative Nursing 
 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 3 of 27 
 
1. Acello, B. & Hegner, B. (2016). Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage Learning. 
2. Acello, B. (2016). Workbook to accompany: Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage 
Learning 
3. Carter, P. J. (2017). Lippincott Essentials for Nursing Assistants: a Humanistic Approach to Caregiving. (4th ed.) Philadelphia, PA. 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 
4. Deck, M. L. (2004). Instant Teaching Tools for the New Millennium. St Louis, MO. Mosby 
5. Hedman, S. A., Fuzy, J., & Rymer, S. (2018). Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque, NM. 
Hartman Publishing, Inc. 
6. Hartman Publishing. (2018). Workbook for Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque, NM. 
Hartman Publishing, Inc. 
7. Haroun, L. & Royce, S. (2004). Teaching Ideas and Activities for Health Care. Albany, NY. Delmar Publishers 
8. Pearson Vue (2018) California Nurse Assistant Candidate Handbook for National Nurse Aide Assessment Program. Philadelphia, 
PA. Pearson Education, Inc. 
9. RHORC RESTORATIVE CARE MODULE, available at www.ca-hwi.org
. 
10. Sorrentino, S. A., Remmert, L., & and Kelly, R. (2018) Workbook and Competency Evaluation Review for Moby’s Textbook for 
Nursing Assistants (9th ed.) St. Louis, MO. Mosby Company 
11. Sorrentino, S.A. and Remmert, L. (2018) Mosby’s Textbook for Nursing Assistants. (9th ed.). St Louis, MO. Elsevier 
12. Understanding Restorative Care Part 1: Introduction to Restorative Care (2014) by Medcom Trainex
 located at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vfm7k4pxLJs 
13. Weaver, L. & Wilding, M. (2013) The Dimensions of Engaged Teaching: a Practical Guide for Educators. Bloomington, IN. Solution 
Tree Press. 

Module 14- Rehabilitative Nursing 
 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 4 of 27 
 
 
Content Outline Recommended Teaching 
Strategies and Assignments 
Clinical Demonstration/ 
Method of Evaluation 
Objective 1 
Define key terminology. 
A. Review the terms listed in the terminology section 
B. Spell the listed terms accurately 
C. Pronounce the terms correctly 
D. Use the terms in their proper context 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Games: word searches, 
crossword puzzles, Family 
Feud, Jeopardy, bingo, 
spelling bee, hangman, 
and concentration 
C. Encourage use of internet, 
medical dictionary, and 
textbooks 
D. Create flashcards for 
learning purposes 
E. Handout 14.1a- 
Rehabilitative and 
Restorative Care 
Crossword 
F. Handout 14.1b- 
Rehabilitative and 
Restorative Care 
Crossword – KEY 
 
 
A. Have students select 
five words from the list 
of key terminology and 
write a sentence for 
each defining the term 
B. Administer vocabulary 
pre-test and post-test 
C. Uses appropriate 
terminology when 
charting and reporting 
to licensed personnel 
Objective 2 
Discuss rehabilitation (restorative care) and how it promotes 
independence and patient/resident potential. 
A. Disability is a physical and/or mental condition which interferes 
with meeting basic human needs 
B. Effects of disability related to Maslow’s hierarchy 
1. Feelings of loss 
2. Damage to self-image 
3. Loss of self-esteem 
C. Restorative/rehab care helps disabled individuals return to their 
 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
C. Guest speaker on rehab 
 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Class Participation 
 
 
 
 

Module 14- Rehabilitative Nursing 
 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 5 of 27 
 
highest possible level of physical and psychological functioning; 
promotes independence 
1. Helps patient/resident adjust to the disability 
2. Emphasizes abilities – learn new skills and retain old skills 
3. Prevention of deterioration – leading to decline in condition 
4. Prevents complications – rehab begins when 
patient/resident first enters facility 
5. Identify risk factors contributing to disability 
 
Objective 3 
State goals of restorative care that promote independence and 
patient/resident potential. 
A. Physical goals of rehabilitation/restorative care and ADLs 
1. Maintain present level of function 
2. Improve/restore physical function 
3. Encourage independence and performance of self-care 
activities 
B. Psychosocial goals of rehabilitation/restorative care 
1. Adjust to psychosocial effects of disability 
2. Recognizes small and simple accomplishments 
a. Social service referrals 
b. Job skill development 
 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Promotes 
patient’s/resident’s 
independence in self- 
care activities 
Objective 4 
Describe the rehabilitation team, state its purpose, and discuss 
the role of the Nurse Assistant as a member of the team. 
A. Rehabilitation team 
1. Rehabilitation is a skilled care provided by licensed therapy 
staff and their assistants 
2. Members 
a. Patient/resident 
b. Family members 
c. Nurse Assistant 
d. Licensed nursing staff 
e. Physical Therapist 
 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
C. Arrange for guest speaker 
from a rehab facility 
D. Show examples of 
patient/resident 
rehabilitation plan 
E. Participate in 
patient/resident care 
conference 
 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Provides 
patient/resident care 
consistent with 
rehabilitation efforts 
 

Module 14- Rehabilitative Nursing 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 6 of 27 
 
f. Occupational Therapist 
g. Speech Therapist 
h. Physician 
i. Activity Leader 
j. Social Worker 
k. Clergy 
l. Dietitian 
B. Purpose of rehabilitation 
1. Discuss and evaluate patient’s/resident’s level of functioning 
2. Establish patient’s/resident’s care plan and goals for 
rehabilitation 
3. Evaluate progress and adjust plan of care to achieve 
patient’s/resident’s goals with a greater degree of 
patient/resident independence 
4. Restore the patient/resident to his/her optimal level of 
functioning 
C. Nurse Assistant responsibilities as a member of the rehabilitation 
team 
1. Participate in patient/resident care planning conferences 
2. Observe and report patient’s/resident’s responses to care 
3. Follow the patient’s/resident’s care plan 
4. Encourage the patient/resident to follow the rehabilitation plan 
5. Observe and report early signs and symptoms of 
complications 
 
Objective 5 
List the responsibilities of the Nurse Assistant in promoting 
patient/resident self-care. 
A. Protect patient’s/resident’s rights 
B. Ensure safety and privacy 
C. Communicate therapeutically – ask patient’s/residents’ 
opinions and let them have control 
D. Adhere to legal and ethical principles 
E. Follow instructions of immediate supervisor and plan of care 
 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Demonstrates 
consistent application 
of Nurse Assistant 
responsibilities in 
promoting self-care 
 

Module 14- Rehabilitative Nursing 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 7 of 27 
 
F. Report significant changes in patient/resident condition 
G. Practice appropriate and effective nursing care 
H. Implement rehabilitative measures as ordered, i.e., ROM, training 
plan for patient/resident self-care 
I. Encourage patient/resident independence – praise 
even small accomplishments 
J. Provide emotional support and reassurance 
K. Follow the documentation guidelines 
L. Concentrate on patient’s/resident’s abilities 
M. Use equipment and devices appropriately (cast, prosthesis, 
walker, cane, wedge for post open reduction internal fixation – hip 
surgery) 
N. Protect patient/resident from abuse 
 
Objective 6 
List activities that make up Activities of Daily Living (ADLs). 
A. Daily hygiene, grooming, eating, and self-care activities necessary 
for normal functioning in society 
B. Examples: 
1. Grooming 
2. Dressing 
3. Eating 
4. Hygiene 
5. Elimination – bowel and bladder 
6. Mobility/ambulation 
7. Self-turning and positioning 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
C. Clinical observation 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Assist 
patients/residents in 
performing ADLs as 
necessary 
Objective 7 
List common comfort and adaptive devices and explain the 
purposes of each. 
A. Comfort devices and their purposes: 
1. Footboard; prevents plantar flexion 
2. Trochanter roll; prevents external rotation and pressure sores 
3. Hard splint; prevents contractures 
4. Bed cradle; prevents foot drop 
 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
C. Demonstrate devices 
D. Catalogs from medical 
stores to show pictures 
E. Role play students 
 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Uses adaptive/comfort 
devices appropriately 
 
 

Module 14- Rehabilitative Nursing 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 8 of 27 
 
 
5. Trapeze; strengthens muscles and facilitates movement 
6. Sheepskin; avoids friction, skin breakdown 
7. Heel/elbow protectors; protect against friction, skin breakdown 
8. Flotation pads, egg crate mattress, water bed, alternating 
pressure mattress; Clinitron bed protects pressure points, 
prevents skin breakdown 
9. Pillows and boosters; provide support, positioning, and prevent 
contractures 
10. Cast/traction; keep the affected site in proper alignment, 
prevent complication 
B. Adaptive/self-help devices – their purpose and use: 
1. Cuffed or swivel-handled utensils, plate guards or holders; 
eating utensils 
2. Long-handled combs/brushes, button hooks, sock puller, 
specially designed clothing; hygiene and grooming aides 
3. Reachers, telephone holder, communication boards; promote 
independence 
4. Artificial limbs, application, care and removal 
5. Casts and splints; immobilization, alignment, and support, cast 
care 
assisting disabled persons 
with adaptive devices 
F. Return demonstration on 
range-of-motion manual 
skills and care of casts 
G. Manual Skills 14.7- 
Providing Cast Care 
 
Objective 8 
Identify steps to prevent complications from inactivity. 
A. Complications 
1. Types: 
a. Neurological (stress, depression, changes in behavior, 
sleep disturbances) 
b. Respiratory (stasis pneumonia or atelectasis) 
c. Circulatory 
1) Thrombophlebitis 
2) Pulmonary embolism 
d. Musculo-skeletal 
1) Contractures – are permanent 
2) Osteoporosis – demineralization due to lack of weight 
bearing 
3) Muscle atrophy 
 
 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Uses appropriate 
methods to prevent 
complications from 
inactivity 
 
 

Module 14- Rehabilitative Nursing 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
 
e. Integumentary (pressure sores) 
f. Gastro-intestinal (constipation and decrease of appetite) 
g. Genito-urinary (kidney stones, urinary tract infection) 
h. Psychosocial (loneliness, depression) 
2. Causes: 
a. Bed rest 
b. Prolonged illness 
c. Immobility due to injury 
d. Surgery 
B. Preventive methods 
1. Turning/repositioning 
2. TCDB (turn, cough, and deep-breathing exercises) 
3. Body alignment 
4. Range of motion 
5. Supportive devices 
6. Skin care 
7. Encouraging patient/resident independence 
8. Toileting 
9. Bowel and bladder training 
10. Elastic stockings 
11. Ambulation is best 
a. Maintains muscles and bones; moves joints 
b. Reduces pressure on the skin 
c. Increases circulation 
d. Increases respiratory and heart function 
e. Improves bowel function and promotes emptying of 
bladder 
f. Promotes independence and self-esteem 
g. If patient/resident cannot walk, at least stand, or transfer 
them to a chair 
 
 
 

Module 14- Rehabilitative Nursing 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 9 of 26 
 
 
 
Objective 9 
Describe range-of-motion exercises (ROM). 
A. Range of motion is movement of joints through their normal range 
of movement to the point of resistance or discomfort 
B. Purpose 
1. Maintain muscle strength 
2. Stimulate circulation 
3. Maintain body alignment and make positioning easier 
4. Prevent thrombophlebitis 
5. Prevent contractures 
C. Frequency 
1. At least three times each day with at least three repetitions of 
each movement of the joint 
2. As indicated in the care plan 
D. Technique 
1. Active ROM 
a. Best 
b. Patient/resident moves own joints through their normal 
range of movement 
c. Maintains muscle 
2. Passive ROM 
a. Nurse Assistant moves the patient’s/resident’s joints 
through their normal range of movement to the point of 
resistance or discomfort 
b. Still gets muscle atrophy 
3. Active assistive ROM - the Nurse Assistant helps the 
patient/resident move his/her joints through their normal range 
of movement to the point of resistance or discomfort or the 
patient/resident uses a resistive device 
E. General rules to avoid injury 
1. Exercise joint correctly 
2. Avoid unnecessary exposure of patient/resident 
3. Use good body mechanics 
 
 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
C. Demonstrate ROM; active 
and passive 
D. Manual Skills 14.9a - 
Range of Motion 
exercises 
E. Manual Skills 14.9b - 
Performs passive range of 
motion - PROM for one 
knee and one ankle 
F. Manual skills 14.9c - 
Passive range of motion- 
PROM for one shoulder 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Performs basic range 
of motion exercises 
correctly 

Module 14- Rehabilitative Nursing 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 10 of 26 
 
 
 
4. Fully support each extremity 
5. Move joint slowly, smoothly and gently 
6. Do not force the joint to move past the point of resistance or 
patient/resident discomfort 
7. Do not cause the patient/resident to have pain 
8. Report patient/resident complaint of pain to the licensed nurse 
 
Objective 10 
Identify procedures and devices used to promote mobility and 
ambulation for patients/residents with physical and/or visual 
impairment. 
A. Things to check to determine if patient/resident can be more 
independent 
1. Physical strength and ability 
2. Available special training 
3. Assistive devices 
4. Financial resources 
5. Cognitive ability 
6. Motivation 
B. Procedures 
1. Transfer techniques – review from Module 5 
a. Follow facility policy on lifting and transferring 
b. Patient/resident weight above 100 lbs. requires two 
person assists 
c. Patient/resident with osteoporosis should be 
transferred using manual team lift 
2. Gait training 
3. Training in self-transfer techniques 
4. Use of gait belt for ambulation 
5. Check to see if the patient/resident can sit unassisted and 
steadily, as well as stand a few seconds alone 
C. Assistive devices 
1. Cane 
2. Walker 
3. Wheelchair 
 
 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
C. Role play various physical 
and visual impairments. 
Have students discuss 
how they felt and what 
devices or procedures 
would help them 
D. Demo, practice 
E. Review video showing 
techniques as needed 
 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Uses assistive devices 
and procedures 
appropriately 

Module 14- Rehabilitative Nursing 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 11 of 26 
 
 
 
4. Transfer board 
5. Braces, splints, and prostheses 
6. Service animals (Seeing Eye and Hearing Ear dogs) 
7. Braille 
8. Modifications to accommodate wheelchair access 
9. Disabled parking 
D. Care and use of adaptive, assistive, and orthotic devices 
 
Objective 11 
Discuss relationship between patient’s/resident’s self-esteem 
and family involvement in care. 
A. Basic needs as defined by Maslow which can be met by involving 
the patient/resident and his/her family in developing and 
participating in the plan of restorative care 
1. Love/belonging/affiliation needs 
2. The need for self-esteem 
3. The need for self-actualization 
B. Methods of assisting the patient/resident to meet these 
needs – therapeutic communication 
1. Promote interaction between the patient/resident, the family, 
and the rehabilitation team 
2. Treat the patient/resident and family with respect and dignity 
3. Be supportive of the patient/resident and his/her family and 
use praise as appropriate to reinforce progress 
4. Encourage patient/resident independence 
5. Use a positive approach to restorative plan 
 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Practices consistent, 
effective therapeutic 
communication with 
patients/residents 
and their families 
Objective 12 
Discuss the process of documentation and the Nurse Assistant 
role in care plan meeting. 
A. Nurse Assistant helps the team members in completing the 
Patient/resident Assessment Instrument (RAI) as mandated by 
federal government 
 
 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Assist student to 
 
 
 

Module 14- Rehabilitative Nursing 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 12 of 26 
 
 
 
B. RAI consist of three parts: 
1. Minimum Data Set 3.0 (MDS 3.0) – assessment tool 
2. Triggers – condition that identifies problem (risk factors) that 
may require care plan 
3. Patient/resident Assessment Protocol (RAPs) – list of 
information and guidelines that will link to care plan goals 
C. MDS Assessment is utilized and completed upon admission, 
quarterly, annually, and when there is a significant change in 
condition 
D. Nurse Assistant will provide information to complete the 
appropriate section(s) of the MDS 
E. Care Plan will be reviewed during IDT meeting 
F. Team discusses the appropriate interventions; updates the 
information that reflects current patient/resident functioning 
G. Nurse Assistant contributes valuable information because of being 
the direct patient care provided, especially in the areas of activities 
of daily living 
C. Sample minimum data set 
3.0 Form 
D. Download MDS form at 
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/ 
E. Show sample of Care Plan 
Form 
review the 
patient/resident 
clinical record under 
MDS section and Care 
Plan section of the 
record 
C. Interpret the codes as 
appropriate that reflect 
patient/resident 
functioning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Module 14- Rehabilitative Nursing 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 13 of 26 
 
 
 
Sample Test: Module 14- Rehabilitative Nursing 
 
1. Rehabilitation 
A. Assists the patient/resident to attain his/her highest level of ability 
B. Requires the services of only licensed personnel to be successful 
C. May be provided in the hospital, subacute unit, home, or skilled care facility 
D. All of the above 
 
2. OBRA regulation requires: 
A. Hospitals to provide rehabilitation services 
B. Skilled nursing facilities to provide restorative care 
C. Patients to participate in rehabilitation programs 
D. Restorative care for alert patients/residents only 
 
3. The main therapy that assists patients/residents to re-learn activities of daily living is: 
A. Physical therapy 
B. Speech therapy 
C. Occupational therapy 
D. Cognitive therapy 
 
4. Which of the following is NOT an activity of daily living? 
A. Ambulating 
B. Taking medications 
C. Dressing 
D. Toileting 
 
5. A complication of immobility that affects the musculoskeletal system is: 
A. Contractures 
B. Pressure sores 
C. Thrombus 
D. Pain 

Module 14- Rehabilitative Nursing 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 14 of 26 
 
 
 
6. A complication of immobility that affects the gastrointestinal system is: 
A. Hemorrhoids 
B. Constipation 
C. Diarrhea 
D. Confusion 
 
7. A psychological reaction to immobility is: 
A. Euphoria 
B. Delusions 
C. Depression 
D. Schizophrenia 
 
8. A verbal cue is: 
A. Telling the patient/resident how to perform a procedure 
B. Specific instruction on how to perform a skill 
C. A thorough explanation of a self-care technique 
D. A short, simple phrase to prompt the patient/resident 
 
9. Continuity and consistency of care means that all staff: 
A. Use variations in approaches to the patient/resident 
B. Use the same approaches when caring for the patient/resident 
C. Choose which staff members will work together in the care of the patient/resident 
D. Agree on the plan of care that is needed by the patient/resident 
 
10. If completing an entire task is too difficult for a patient/resident in a restorative program: 
A. Stop trying, and complete the task yourself 
B. Provide total care, which is easier for the patient/resident 
C. Ask the charge nurse (RN/LVN) what you should do 
D. Break the task into a series of smaller tasks 

Module 14- Rehabilitative Nursing 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 15 of 26 
 
 
 
 
True and False 
 
11. Using the care plan is a key to success when caring for patients/residents in rehabilitation and restorative programs. 
12. For effective restorative care, there must be a continuity of care between caregivers and between shifts. 
13. Edema will develop if the patient/resident is very active. 
14. Emphasize the individualism, value, and worth of each patient/resident. 
15. Avoid comparing patients/residents and their progress. 
16. People with disabilities are special and should be treated differently from other patients/residents. 
17. Patients/residents who are newly disabled adapt as easily to their problems as people who have lived with their disability a long 
time. 
18. People with disabilities are not capable to doing the same things that other people do. 
19. One of the goals of restorative care is to prevent complications. 
20. Restorative care is designed to maintain the patient’s/resident’s current abilities. 
21. One of the goals of providing rehabilitation services to a patient/resident with quadriplegia is to teach the patient to walk again. 
22. Patients/residents with spinal cord and brain injuries cannot benefit from a rehabilitative program. 
23. Patients/residents with arthritis may benefit from rehabilitation. 
24. A patient/resident who has been in bed for a long time will not benefit from a rehabilitative program. 
25. Some rehabilitative programs are designed for geriatric patients/residents. 
26. Grooming is not important to the restorative program. 
27. The patient’s/resident’s sexuality is respected in the restorative environment. 
28. Restorative care is part of the assessment item in the Minimum Data Set. 

Module 14- Rehabilitative Nursing 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 16 of 26 
 
 
 
Sample Test Answers: Module 14 
 
1. A 
2. B 
3. C 
4. B 
5. A 
6. B 
7. C 
8. D 
9. B 
10. D 
11. T 
12. T 
13. F 
14. T 
15. T 
16. F 
17. F 
18. F 
19. T 
20. T 
21. F 
22. F 
23. T 
24. F 
25. T 
26. F 
27. T 
28. T 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 17 of 26 
Module 14: Rehabilitative Nursing Manual Skills 14.7: Providing Cast Care 
 
 
 
 
MANUAL SKILL: Providing Cast Care 
 
EQUIPMENT: 
 
Pillows 
Pillow cases 
Plastic pillow covers 
 
BEGINNING STEPS: 
 
1. Wash hands. 
2. Knock and pause before entering the patient’s/resident’s room. 
3. Introduce self. 
4. Identify patient/resident. 
5. Explain procedure speaking clearly, slowly, and directly, maintaining face-to-face contact whenever possible 
6. Gather equipment, if applicable. 
7. Provide for privacy with a curtain, door, or screen 
8. Apply gloves (standard precautions) 
 
SKILL STEPS: 
 
1. Care of newly casted patient/resident: 
A. Support cast with two (2) pillows covered with plastic cover and cloth pillowcase. Keep cast elevated and uncovered. 
B. Observe fingers or toes of casted limb for swelling, cyanosis, or coldness. Ask patient/resident if he/she feels pain, 
tingling or numbness. Report to licensed nurse immediately if above symptoms are present. 
C. Use palms of hands if cast must be moved, not fingers, they will indent soft drying cast. 
D. Check skin area around cast edges for signs of irritation (red, dry, itching, scratching). Notify licensed nurse if edges of cast 
need to be taped or padded. 
2. After cast is dry: 
A. Support cast with pillows or sling as ordered. 
B. Turn patient/resident according to facility policy. 
C. Promote independence; encourage use of overhead (trapeze) bar to assist patient/resident in helping self. 
D. Perform capillary check of toes or fingers on casted extremity. 
E. Check skin areas around edge of cast for redness or abrasions. 
F. Observe for unusual odors or areas of warmth on the surface of the cast. 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 18 of 26 
Module 14: Rehabilitative Nursing Manual Skills 14.7: Providing Cast Care 
 
 
 
 
G. Do not allow any objects such as coat hangers to be inserted into the cast for scratching. 
H. During elimination, use plastic wrap to protect edges of cast near genitals and buttocks to prevent soiling from urine or feces. 
I. Check with licensed nurse for bathing procedures. You may need to wrap entire casted area with plastic bag so 
patient/resident can be showered. 
 
ENDING STEPS: 
 
1. Clean and return equipment and supplies, if applicable. 
2. Remove gloves (without contaminating self) into waste container and wash hands. 
3. Position patient/resident comfortably. 
4. Place call light within reach. 
5. Lower bed to safe position for the patient/resident. 
6. Leave room neat. 
7. Wash hands. 
8. Document. 
9. Report abnormal findings to licensed nurse. 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 19 of 26 
Module 14: Rehabilitative Nursing Manual Skills 14.9a- Range of Motion 
 
 
 
MANUAL SKILL: Range-of-Motion Exercises 
 
EQUIPMENT: 
 
Bath blanket 
 
BEGINNING STEPS: 
 
1. Wash hands. 
2. Knock and pause before entering the patient’s/resident’s room. 
3. Introduce self. 
4. Identify patient/resident. 
5. Explain procedure speaking clearly, slowly, and directly. Maintain face-to-face contact whenever possible 
6. Gather equipment, if applicable. 
7. Provide for privacy with a curtain, door, or screen 
8. Apply gloves (standard precautions) 
 
SKILL STEPS: 
 
1. Raise bed to working height. 
2. Lower rail on the side you will be working on 
3. Position the patient/resident in supine position and in good alignment. 
4. Cover the patient/resident with a bath blanket. Fan fold linen in the foot of the bed. 
5. Determine the areas to be exercised, full body or extremities only. (See patient/resident care plan for specific instructions as to 
areas to exercise). Move joints through normal range of motion to point of resistance or discomfort; do not force joint to point of 
pain. Each joint should be moved through its ROM at least three times. 
6. Instructs client to inform Nurse Assistant if pain is experienced during exercise. 
7. To exercise the shoulder moving joints slowly, gently and smoothly: 
A. Support the arm by grasping the wrist with one hand and elbow with the other. 
B. Flexion, raise the arm straight in front and over the head. 
C. Extension, bring the arm down to the side. 
D. Hyperextension, turn the patient/resident to the side and move the top arm behind the body. (If the person is sitting in a 
straight chair or standing, move the arm behind the body). Turn patient/resident back to supine position to continue. 
E. Abduction, move the straight arm away from the side of the body. 
F. Adduction, move the straight arm to the side of the body. 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 20 of 26 
Module 14: Rehabilitative Nursing Manual Skills 14.9a- Range of Motion 
 
 
 
 
G. Internal rotation, bend the elbow to a 90-degree angle and place it at the same level as the shoulder. Keeping the angle of 
the elbow constant, move the forearm down toward the lower body. 
H. External rotation, reverse the procedure, moving the forearm toward the head. 
8. To exercise the elbow: 
A. Grasp the patient’s/resident’s wrist with one hand and the elbow with the other. 
B. Flexion, bend the arm so that the same-side shoulder is touched by the patient’s/resident’s thumb. 
C. Extension, straighten the arm. 
9. To exercise the forearm: 
A. Pronation, turn the hand so that the palm is down. 
B. Supination, turn the hand so that the palm is up. 
10. To exercise the wrist: 
A. Hold the wrist firmly with both of your hands. 
B. Flexion, bend the hand down. 
C. Extension, straighten the hand. 
D. Hyperextension, bend the hand back. 
E. Radial flexion, turn the hand toward the thumb. 
F. Ulnar flexion, turn the hand toward the little finger. 
11. To exercise the thumb: 
A. Hold the patient’s/resident’s hand with one hand and the thumb with your other hand. (Support the wrist of the hand being 
exercised). 
B. Abduction, move the thumb out from the inner part of the index finger. 
C. Adduction, move the thumb back next to the index finger. 
D. Opposition, touch each fingertip with the thumb. 
E. Flexion, bend thumb into hand. 
F. Extension, move the thumb out to the side of the fingers. 
12. To exercise the fingers: 
A. Abduction, spread the fingers and the thumb apart. 
B. Adduction, bring the fingers and thumb together. 
C. Extension, straighten the fingers so that the fingers, hand, and arm are straight. 
D. Flexion, make a fist. 
13. To exercise the hip: 
A. Place one hand under the knee and the other under the ankle to support the leg. 
B. Flexion, raise the leg. 
C. Extension, straighten out the leg. 
D. Abduction, move the leg away from the body. 
E. Adduction, move the leg toward the other leg. 
F. Internal rotation, turn the leg inward. 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 21 of 26 
Module 14: Rehabilitative Nursing Manual Skills 14.9a- Range of Motion 
 
 
 
 
G. External rotation, turn the leg outward. 
14. To exercise the knee: 
A. Place one hand under the knee and the other under the heel to support the foot and ankle. Slide the hand supporting the foot 
up toward the thigh while lifting the knee. 
B. Flexion, bend the knee. 
C. Extension, straighten the knee. 
15. To exercise the ankle: 
A. Place one hand under the heel with foot supported by forearm and the other under the ankle to support the ankle. 
B. Dorsiflexion, lean toward head of bed, bringing foot into dorsiflexion. 
C. Plantar flexion, with supporting hand, move heel downward, plantar flexing the foot. 
16. To exercise the foot: 
A. Eversion, turn the outside of the foot up and the inside down. 
B. Inversion, turn the inside of the foot up and the outside down. 
17. To exercise the toes: 
A. Flexion, curl the toes. 
B. Extension, straighten the toes. 
C. Adduction, pull the toes together. 
D. Abduction, spread the toes apart. 
18. Cover the leg and raise the side rail. 
19. Go to the other side. Lower the side rail and repeat the range of motion beginning at the shoulders. 
 
ENDING STEPS: 
 
1. Clean and return equipment and supplies, if applicable. 
2. Remove gloves (without contaminating self) into waste container and wash hands. 
3. Position patient/resident comfortably. 
4. Place call light within reach. 
5. Lower bed to safe position for the patient/resident. 
6. Leave room neat. 
7. Wash hands. 
8. Document. 
9. Report abnormal findings to licensed nurse. 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 22 of 26 
Module 14: Rehabilitative Nursing Manual Skills 14.9c- PROM on Knee and Ankle 
 
 
 
 
MANUAL SKILLS: Performs Passive Range of Motion (PROM) for One Shoulder 
 
Equipment: 
 
None 
 
Beginning Skills: 
 
1. Wash hands. 
2. Knock and pause before entering the patient’s/resident’s room. 
3. Introduce self. 
4. Identify patient/resident. 
5. Explain procedure speaking clearly, slowly, and directly. Maintain face-to-face contact whenever possible 
6. Provide for privacy with a curtain, door, or screen. 
 
Skill Steps: 
 
1. Instruct client to inform candidate if pain is experienced during exercise. 
2. Supports client’s upper and lower arm while performing range of motion for shoulder 
3. Raises client’s straightened arm from side position upward toward head to ear level and returns arm down to side of body 
(flexion/extension) (AT LEAST 3 TIMES unless pain is verbalized). Supporting the limbs moves joint gently, slowly, and smoothly 
through range of motion, discontinuing exercise if client verbalizes pain. 
4. Moves client’s straightened arm away from the side of the body to shoulder level and returns to side of body 
(abduction/adduction) (AT LEAST 3 TIMES unless pain is verbalized). Supporting the limbs moves joint gently, slowly, and 
smoothly through range of motion, discontinuing exercise if client verbalizes pain. 
 
Ending Steps: 
1. Position patient/resident comfortably. 
2. Place call light within reach. 
3. Lower bed to safe position for the patient/resident. 
4. Leave room neat. 
5. Wash hands. 
6. Document. 
7. Report abnormal findings to licensed nurse. 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 23 of 26 
Module 14: Rehabilitative Nursing Manual Skills 14.9c- PROM on Knee and Ankle 
 
 
 
 
MANUAL SKILLS: Performs Passive Range of Motion (PROM) for One Knee and One Ankle 
 
Equipment: 
 
None 
 
Beginning Steps: 
 
1. Wash hands. 
2. Knock and pause before entering the patient’s/resident’s room. 
3. Introduce self. 
4. Identify patient/resident. 
5. Explain procedure speaking clearly, slowly, and directly. Maintain face-to-face contact whenever possible 
6. Provide for privacy with a curtain, door, or screen 
 
Skill Steps: 
 
1. Instructs client to inform candidate if pain is experienced during exercise. 
2. Supports leg at knee and ankle while performing range of motion for knee. 
3. Bends the knee and then returns leg to client’s normal position (extension/flexion) (AT LEAST 3 TIMES unless pain is 
verbalized). 
4. Supports foot and ankle close to the bed while performing range of motion for ankle. 
5. Push/pull foot toward head (dorsiflexion) and push/pull foot down, toes point down (plantar flexion) (AT LEAST 3 TIMES unless 
pain is verbalized). 
6. While supporting the limb, move joints gently, slowly, and smoothly through the range of motion, discontinuing exercise if client 
verbalizes pain. 
 
 
Ending Steps: 
1. Position patient/resident comfortably. 
2. Place call light within reach. 
3. Lower bed to safe position for the 
patient/resident. 
4. Leave room neat. 
5. Wash hands. 
 
6. Document. 
7. Report abnormal findings to licensed nurse. 

Module 14: Rehabilitative Nursing 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum 
- Revised December 2018 
 
Page 24 of 26 
 
 
 
 
 

Module 14: Rehabilitative Nursing 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum 
- Revised December 2018 
 
Page 25 of 26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Across Down 
1. Devices used to help someone adjust to 
their environment. 
1. Short for “activities of daily living.” 
3. Physical force on a body part. 2. Inflammation of a vein. 
6. Not active. 4. Short for “range of motion.” 
8. A special type of bed. 5. Where one bone connects with another 
bone. 
10. Short for “turn, cough, and deep breath.” 7. A wire frame placed over the lower part of 
the bed. 
11. A physical handicap which prevents 
someone from engaging in certain activities. 
9. Return to a normal condition. 
13. Walking. 12. A clot or substance in blood vessel causing 
obstruction. 
14. Helpful; referring to devices. 
15. Shortening of a muscle causing limited 
movement of a joint. 
 

Module 14: Rehabilitative Nursing 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum 
- Revised December 2018 
 
Page 26 of 26