Module 15: Observation and Charting 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 1 of 21 
 
 
Module 15: Observation and Charting 
Minimum Number of Theory Hours: 4 
Recommended Clinical Hours: 4 
 
Statement of Purpose: 
The purpose of this unit is to prepare students to know how, when, and why to use objective and subjective observation skills. They 
will report and record observations on appropriate documents using medical terms and abbreviations. 
 
Terminology: 
1. Abbreviation 
2. Activities of Daily Living (ADL) 
3. Assessment 
4. Assessment Reference Day (ARD) 
5. Incident report 
6. Kardex 
7. Minimum Data Set (MDS) 
8. Objective 
9. Observation 
 
10. Paraprofessional Healthcare Institute (PHI) 
http://phinational.org/about/ 
11. Prefix 
12. Range of Motion (ROM) 
13. Resident Assessment Instrument (RAI) 
14. Resident Assessment Protocol (RAP) 
15. Patient/resident care plan 
16. Root word 
17. Subjective 
18. Suffix 
 
Patient, resident, and client are synonymous terms referring to the person receiving care 
 
Performance Standards (Objectives): 
Upon completion of the four (4) hours of class plus homework assignments and four (4) hours of clinical experience, the learner will 
be able to: 
1. Define key terminology 
2. Identify word elements used in medical terms 
3. Identify medical terminology and abbreviations commonly used in medical facilities 
4. Define observation and list the senses used to observe a patient/resident. 
5. Describe objective and subjective observations 
6. List types of charting documents and the use for each 
7. Explain how to accurately complete ADL assessment for MDS 
8. Discuss procedures to use when recording on a patient’s/resident’s chart 

Module 15: Observation and Charting 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 2 of 21 
 
 
 
References: 
1. Acello, B. & Hegner, B. (2016). Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage Learning. 
2. Acello, B. (2016). Workbook to accompany: Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage 
Learning 
3. Carter, P. J. (2017). Lippincott Essentials for Nursing Assistants: a Humanistic Approach to Caregiving. (4th ed.) Philadelphia, PA. 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 
1. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services : www.cms.hhs.gov 
2. Deck, M. L. (2004). Instant Teaching Tools for the New Millennium. St Louis, MO. Mosby 
3. Hedman, S. A., Fuzy, J., & Rymer, S. (2018). Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque, NM. 
Hartman Publishing, Inc. 
4. Hartman Publishing. (2018). Workbook for Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque, NM. 
Hartman Publishing, Inc. 
5. Haroun, L. & Royce, S. (2004). Teaching Ideas and Activities for Health Care. Albany, NY. Delmar Publishers 
6. Pearson Vue (2018) California Nurse Assistant Candidate Handbook for National Nurse Aide Assessment Program. Philadelphia, 
PA. Pearson Education, Inc. 
7. Sorrentino, S. A., Remmert, L., & and Kelly, R. (2018) Workbook and Competency Evaluation Review for Moby’s Textbook for 
Nursing Assistants (9th ed.) St. Louis, MO. Mosby Company 
8. Sorrentino, S.A. and Remmert, L. (2018) Mosby’s Textbook for Nursing Assistants. (9th ed.). St Louis, MO. Elsevier 
9. Weaver, L. & Wilding, M. (2013) The Dimensions of Engaged Teaching: a Practical Guide for Educators. Bloomington, IN. Solution 
Tree Press. 

Module 15: Observation and Charting 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 3 of 21 
 
 
 
 
Content Outline 
Recommended Teaching 
Strategies and 
Assignments 
Clinical Demonstration/ 
Method of Evaluation 
Objective 1 
Define key terminology. 
A. Review the terms listed in the terminology section 
B. Spell the listed terms accurately 
C. Pronounce the terms correctly 
D. Use the terms in their proper context 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Games: word 
searches, crossword 
puzzles, Family Feud, 
Jeopardy, bingo, 
spelling bee, hangman, 
and concentration 
C. Encourage use of 
internet, medical 
dictionary, and 
textbooks 
D. Create flashcards for 
learning purposes 
E. Handout 15.1a- 
Observation and 
Charting Crossword 
F. Handout 15.1b- 
Observation and 
Charting Crossword- 
KEY 
 
 
A. Have students select 
five words from the list 
of key terminology and 
write a sentence for 
each defining the term 
B. Administer vocabulary 
pre-test and post-test 
C. Uses appropriate 
terminology when 
charting and reporting 
to licensed personnel 
Objective 2 
Identify word elements used in medical terms. 
A. Medical words are composed of several small words or word 
elements 
B. Word elements 
1. Root 
2. Prefix 
3. Suffix 
4. Combining vowel 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Handout 15.2- Prefixes 
and Suffixes 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Class participation 
 

Module 15: Observation and Charting 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 4 of 21 
 
 
 
Objective 3 
Identify medical terminology and abbreviations generally used in 
medical facilities. 
A. Identify medical terminology and abbreviations from list determined by 
instructor 
B. Abbreviations are/may be 
1. A shortened form of words or phrases 
2. Commonly used in health care settings 
3. Designations for medical specialty areas: ER, OR, OB, etc. 
4. Shortened forms of a word or the first letters of a word: amb, BRP, 
lab, etc. 
5. A shortened form of a Latin or Greek word: ad lib, prn, po, etc. 
C. Refer to facility policy on approved abbreviations 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Class participation 
C. Uses correct terms and 
abbreviations in 
charting 
Objective 4 
Define observation and list the senses used to observe a 
patient/resident. 
A. Observation – use of senses to collect information about a 
patient/resident 
1. Senses used for evaluation 
a. Sight 
b. Touch 
c. Hearing 
d. Smell 
2. Observations should be made with regard to a patient’s/resident’s 
a. Skin color and temperature 
b. Mood and mental status 
c. Behavior, movement 
d. Unusual odors 
e. Respiration 
f. Ability to respond 
g. Appetite 
h. Performance of ADL 
i. Elimination 
j. Pain or discomfort 
Learn to observe the patient/resident throughout daily contacts 
noting any changes or needs 
4. Report all changes or needs to licensed nurse 
 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Role-play a scene and 
have students write 
down their 
observations when 
scene is over 
 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Class participation 
 

Module 15: Observation and Charting 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 5 of 21 
 
 
 
B. ABCs of observation 
1. Appearance 
2. Behavior 
3. Communication 
 
Objective 5 
Describe objective and subjective observations. 
A. Objective 
1. Signs that you can see, hear, feel and smell 
2. Factual, measurable and/or observable signs 
B. Subjective 
1. What the patient/resident tells you 
2. Not directly seen (observed) by the nurse assistant 
3. Symptoms reported by patient/resident 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Develop lists of 
observable signs and 
statements from client 
and items that would 
not have been 
observed directly. Ask 
students to label as 
Objective or 
Subjective 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Class participation 
Objective 6 
List types of charting documents and the uses for each. 
A. Patient/resident record and patient’s/resident’s chart 
1. Communicates and records health history, status, and treatment 
2. A legal record 
B. Patient care summary/care plan 
1. Summarizes physician’s orders 
2. Identifies critical data such as allergies, code status, diet, activity, 
etc. 
3. Gives medication and treatment information 
C. Nursing care plan 
1. Lists patient’s/resident’s need and provides specific nursing 
activities that address the patient’s/resident’s needs 
2. A guide for the Nurse Assistant for delivering care 
D. Graphic sheet - used in some facilities to document 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Examples of Mock 
Charts 
E. Example of Patient care 
summary/care plan 
C. 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Class participation 
 

Module 15: Observation and Charting 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 6 of 21 
 
 
 
1. Vital signs 
2. Intake and output 
3. Weight 
E. ADL sheet 
1. Used to document care at each shift for activities of daily living 
2. The record on which most facilities have the care work chart 
 
Objective 7 
Explain how to accurately complete ADL assessment for MDS. 
A. Minimum Data Set (MDS) 
1. Mandated assessment tool by Federal regulation (483.20 (b)) and 
(F272) to give facility structured, standardized approach to care 
2. Basis for payment/or reimbursement to the facility 
B. Patient/resident Assessment Instrument (RAI) 
1. Each facility must use its state-specified RAI to assess newly 
admitted patients/residents, conduct an annual reassessment 
and assess those patients/residents who experience a significant 
change in status 
2. The facility is responsible for addressing all needs and strengths 
of patients/residents regardless of whether the issue is included 
in the Minimum Data Set (MDS) or Patient/resident Assessment 
Protocol (RAPs) 
3. The scope of the RAI does not limit the facility’s responsibility to 
assess and address all care needed by the patient/resident 
C. MDS Section G refers to physical functioning and structural problems 
1. Bathing 
2. Functional limitation in Range of Motion 
3. Modes of Transfer 
D. Assessment Reference Day (ARD) 
1. ARD – set date for the last day of assessment period 
2. Assessments are made during the seven days preceding the ARD 
(the look back period) 
3. Example: ARD is Jan. 8. Therefore, the look back period of 
observation will start from Jan. 2 until Jan. 8 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Refer to MDS form 
Section G Appendix 
7.5. ONLINE FORM 
C. Refer to Appendix H- 
MDS Version 3.0 All 
Forms 
Access form at 
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/nu 
rsinghomequalityinits/ 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Class participation 
C. Document 
patient/resident ADL 
functioning using the 
ADL flow sheet 
 

Module 15: Observation and Charting 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 7 of 21 
 
 
 
E. Two categories of ADL section: 
1. Patient/resident ADL Self-performance - what the patient/resident 
actually did for himself or herself and/or how much verbal or 
physical help was required by staff members during all shifts 
2. Patient/resident ADL support provided or needed 
F. The reporting of the Nurse Assistant on changes in patient/resident 
assessment may “trigger” (identify) a problem that needs evaluation 
and require care planning by the licensed nurse 
G. Coding for ADL Self-performance: 
1. 0: Independent – no help or staff oversight –OR – staff help 
oversight provided. Only one or two times during the last seven 
days 
2. 1: Supervision – oversight, encouragement, or cueing provided 
three or more times during the last seven days – OR – 
supervision (three or more times) plus physical assistance 
provided, but only one or two times during the last seven days 
3. 2: Limited Assistance – patient/resident is highly involved in 
activity, received physical help in guided maneuvering of limbs 
or other non-weight-bearing assistance on three or more 
occasions – OR 
– limited assistance three or more times), plus more weight- 
bearing support provided, but for only one or two times during the 
last seven days 
4. 3: Extensive Assistance – while the patient/resident performed 
part of the activity over last seven days, help of following type(s) 
was provided three or more times: 
a. Weight bearing support three or more times 
b. Full staff performance of activity (three or more times) during 
part (but not all) of last seven days 
5. 4: Total Dependence – full staff performance of the activity during 
entire seven-day period. There is complete non-participation by 
the patient/resident in all aspects of the ADL definition task 
6. 8: Activity did not occur – over the last seven days, the ADL 
 
 
 

Module 15: Observation and Charting 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 8 of 21 
 
 
 
activity was not performed by the patient/resident or staff. In other 
words, the particular activity did not occur at all 
H. ADL support provided: 
1. 0 – No set up or physical help from staff 
2. 1 – Set up help only 
3. 2 – One-person physical assist 
4. 3 – Two + persons physical assist 
5. 8 – ADL activity itself did not occur during entire seven days 
 
Objective 8 
Discuss procedures used when recording on a patient’s/resident’s 
chart. 
A. Charting procedures 
1. Make sure you have the correct chart or ADL sheet 
2. Write legibly and neatly 
a. Write notes on paper first 
b. Check for accuracy and spelling 
3. Place events in proper sequence 
4. Chart according to facility/policy standards 
5. Be concise and use appropriate terms and abbreviations 
6. Always use ballpoint pen 
a. Black ink 
b. No felt tip, fountain pens, pencils or gel pens 
c. Use color only if approved in facility policy 
7. Errors – cross out with one line 
a. DO NOT ERASE OR USE WHITEOUT 
b. Write “error” above the line 
c. Initial the entry 
8. Include patient’s/resident’s complete information on each page 
a. Some facilities have imprint stampers 
b. If not, write in patient’s/resident’s name and any other 
information as the facility mandates 
9. Never skip lines 
10. Signature example; J. Jones, Nurse Assistant or R. Smith, NA. 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Handout 15.8- Charting 
Guides 
C. Use chart forms from 
facilities for charting 
exercises 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Class participation 
C. Documents 
observations promptly 
and correctly according 
to facility policy 
 

Module 15: Observation and Charting 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 9 of 21 
 
 
 
11. Always date and time entries – or make sure you are charting 
under correct date and time 
12. Chart only procedures YOU HAVE PERFORMED – and only after 
you have performed the procedure 
13. Never chart for someone else 
14. Chart only those observations which you know to be true 
(objective data) 
a. Do not chart opinions 
b. Subjective data must be in quotation marks and exactly as the 
patient/resident states 
B. Computers and charting 
1. Some facilities may have a computerized charting system 
2. Basic principles of charting apply – confidentiality and privacy are 
important issues 
3. Systems are password protected 
a. Each user receives a personal password 
b. Never share and/or use others’ passwords 
c. Sharing/using another’s password may be grounds for 
termination 
C. Legal issues of charting 
1. Patient’s/resident’s record is a legal document; it can be used in a 
court of law 
2. Information in the chart must be kept confidential 
3. Information in the chart should be accurate, objective and truthful 
4. The Nurse Assistant has access only to the charts of the 
patients/residents for whom they are caring 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Module 15: Observation and Charting 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 10 of 21 
 
 
Sample Test: Module 15- Observation and Charting 
 
1. Which of the following most completely defines observation? 
A. Watching the activities of the patient/resident 
B. Listening to the patient/resident and to staff reports 
C. Reading the charts and records 
D. Gathering patient/resident information by using the four main senses 
 
2. An error made while writing in the patient’s/resident’s chart is corrected by: 
A. Crossing out the mistake until it can no longer be read 
B. Tearing out the sheet of paper in the chart and write on a new one 
C. Drawing a line through the wrong entry and write an explanation of why it was an error 
D. Drawing a single line through the entry, writing the word “error” above the line, and initial the entry 
 
3. Which of the following statements is an example of objective data or information? 
A. “Mrs. O’Hara said she felt sick to her stomach” 
B. “Mr. Jones says he has pain in the lower part of his back” 
C. “Mrs. O’Hara complained of feeling chilled, so I closed the window” 
D. “Mr. Jones vomited 250cc of fluid after lunch” 
 
4. Using the following statement, identify the sentence that uses the correct abbreviations: Patient/resident up in wheelchair all 
afternoon. Range of motion done three times a day. Physical Therapy to ambulate patient/resident after meals every day. 
Patient/resident may be out of bed as desired. 
A. Res. in w/c all P.M. ROM TID. P.T. to amb. res. pc qd. Res. OOB ad lib. 
B. R. up in W/C all P.M. ROM three qd. Phys.Ther. to amb. R. pc qd. R. out of bed ad lib. 
C. Res. up in wc. qd Range of mot tid. Pt. to amb res qd Patient/resident may be oobed prn. 
D. Res. up in wc. No c/o pain. To x-ray for UGI series 
 
5. The words “ambulatory,” “bathroom privileges” and “before meals” are correctly abbreviated in only one of the sentences below. 
The correct abbreviations are: 
A. Amb., BR, and p.c. 
B. Amb., BR, and a.c. 
C. Amb., BRP, and a.c. 
D. Amb., BRP and p.c. 

Module 15: Observation and Charting 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 11 of 21 
 
 
 
6. A quick, easy, source of patient/resident information which includes the patient’s/resident’s diagnosis, diet, activity, special 
treatments and routine care measures is known as a: 
A. History and physical 
B. Kardex file 
C. Patient flowchart 
D. Graphic chart 
 
7. The Nurse Assistant has just given Mrs. Kennedy a complete bed bath. What type of information would be appropriate to chart? 
A. The condition of Mrs. Kennedy’s skin and how she tolerated the bath 
B. The fact that Mrs. Kennedy accidentally dropped the water pitcher 
C. The fact that Mrs. Kennedy likes her toilet items kept in the overbed table 
D. Mrs. Kennedy’s roommate talked to the Nurse Assistant throughout the entire bathing procedure 
 
8. The routine, daily nursing tasks performed for a patient/resident are charted on the: 
A. Progress sheet 
B. Nurses notes 
C. ADL sheet 
D. Incident report 
 
9. When charting on a patient’s/resident’s medical record, the Nurse Assistant should: 
A. Erase any errors in charting 
B. Always use ink 
C. Skip a line between entries 
D. Chart all procedures to be done 
 
10. A list of the patient’s/resident’s needs and specific nursing activities to address those needs would be found 
A. Patient’s/resident’s care plan 
B. Patient’s/resident’s history and physical 
C. Graphic chart 
D. Nurse’s notes 
 
11. The Minimum Data Set (MDS) manual 
A. Gives a standardized approach to care 
B. Gives a structure to facility care 
C. Helps the nurse complete accurate assessments 
D. Triggers needed assessments 
E. All of the above

Module 15: Observation and Charting 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 12 of 21 
 
 
 
Sample Test Answers: Module 15 
 
1. D 
2. D 
3. D 
4. A 
5. C 
6. B 
7. A 
8. C 
9. B 
10. A 
11. E 

Module 15: Observation and Charting 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum 
- Revised December 2018 
 
Page 14 of 21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Module 15: Observation and Charting 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum 
- Revised December 2018 
 
Page 15 of 21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Module 15: Observation and Charting 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum 
- Revised December 2018 
 
Page 16 of 21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Module 15: Observation and Charting Handout 15.2: Prefixes, Suffixes, and Roots 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 17 of 21 
 
 
 
Prefixes, Suffixes, and Roots 
 
Prefix Meaning 
ab- away from 
ad- toward 
ante- before, forward 
anti- against 
auto- self 
brady- slow 
contra- against, opposite 
dys- bad, difficult, abnormal 
ecto- outer, outside 
en- in, into, within 
endo- inner, inside 
epi- over, on upon 
eryth- red 
hemi- half 
hyper- excessive, high 
hypo- under, decreased 
inter- between 
intra- within 
macro- large 
micro- small 
olig- small, scanty 
peri- around 
poly- many, much 
post- after, behind 
pre- before, in front of, prior to 
pro- before, in front of 
re- again 
retro- backward 
 
 
 

Module 15: Observation and Charting Handout 15.2: Prefixes, Suffixes, and Roots 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 18 of 21 
 
 
 
semi- half 
tachy- fast, rapid 
uni- one 
 
 
 
Suffix Meaning 
-algia pain 
-ectomy excision, removal of 
-genic producing, causing 
-gram record 
-graph a diagram, a recording instrument 
-graphy making a recording 
-iasis condition of 
-itis inflammation 
-logy the study of 
-lysis destruction of, decomposition 
-meter measuring instrument 
-oma tumor 
-pathy disease 
-phasia speaking 
-phobia an exaggerated fear 
-plasty surgical repair or reshaping 
-plegia paralysis 
-ptosis falling, sagging, dropping 
-scope examination instrument 
-scopy examination using a scope 
-stasis maintenance, maintaining a constant level 
-ostomy creation of an opening 
-otomy incision, cutting into 
-uria condition of the urine 
 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 19 of 21 
Module 15: Observations and Charting Handout 15.8- Charting Guides 
 
 
 
Charting Guides 
 
Safety: 
1. Note any safety measures done for patient to protect 
them from harm. If not written on chart, there is no 
record of it being done. 
2. Restraints - note type of restraint, exact time in and 
out, activity done when out of restraint, condition of 
skin, and patient’s response to care given. 
Patient’s Emotions: 
1. Patient’s mood: angry, withdrawn, crying, etc. 
2. Description of unusual symptoms that might indicate 
anxiety like picking at bed sheets, stuttering, 
tenseness, restlessness, vital sign changes, and so on. 
3. Quotation of any verbalized fears: patient states “I am 
afraid of going to sleep – I might die.” 
4. What decreases patient’s anxiety: “Patient less tense 
after group activities and nap.” 
5. Any changes in degree of orientation: “Patient 
recognized nurse and knew what day it was.” 
Range of Motion: 
1. Chart whether it is an active or passive exercise. 
2. Chart problem areas as pain or restricted joint 
movement. 
3. Chart progress made in ROM. 
Positioning: 
1. Time of position change. 
2. What position is the patient put into. 
3. Observations of the skin. 
4. If there is a reddened area, chart what you did about it. 
5. How patient tolerated position. 
Pressure Sore: 
1. Chart factual observations; examples: location - left 
hip, sacrum; condition - reddened area, bleeding, and 
green purulent drainage. 
2. Chart any special treatment used such as bridging, 
positioning, or special equipment. 
Transfer Activities: 
1. Chart the level of the patient’s ability to transfer 
unassisted or with assistance. 
2. Chart how the patient tolerated the procedure 
(important when teaching new independent transfer 
activities). 
Personal Hygiene: 
1. Type of treatment or care given (bath, grooming, back 
care, lotion, makeup) or why care was not given. 
2. Observations of patient’s skin condition, mouth, hair, 
nails, and feet. Words to use for describing the skin 
include pale, red, discolored, clammy, cyanotic (bluish 
tinge), bruised, dry, scaly, excoriated (skin scratched or 
rubbed off). 
3. How much patient is able to do for self. 
4. Emotional state of patient (attitude or moods). Use 
patient’s own words to describe how he or she feels. 
5. Record patient’s complaints of pain, discomfort, and so 
on, with factual statements of observation made 
concerning this. 
6. Observe for any problem areas recorded in previous 
charting and make a factual statement of new 
observations made concerning it. 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 20 of 21 
Module 15: Observations and Charting Handout 15.8- Charting Guides 
 
 
 
Nutrition and Fluid: 
1. Amount of food eaten at every meal (percentage). 
2. Type and amount of food not eaten at each meal. 
3. Appetite if poor. 
4. Whether patient must be fed. 
5. How patient can be helpful to feed self. 
6. Problems with eating. 
7. Special diets, such as mechanical soft or diabetic. 
8. Record intake for every patient with a catheter or on 
bladder training. 
Elimination: 
1. Intake and output must be recorded on all patients with 
retention catheters or on bladder training. 
2. Record urine color, odor, amount, clarity, and presence 
of sediment, mucus, or other material. 
3. Record time of voiding if it is more frequent than every 
two hours. 
4. Record stool size, number, and character: soft, hard, 
liquid. 
5. Unusual occurrences to chart and report 
a. Bright blood in urine or stool. 
b. Mucus in urine or stool. 
c. Very dark and strong-smelling urine. 
d. Voiding 30-50ml every one to two hours. 
e. Burning urination. 
f. Smeary or liquid fecal dribbling. 
6. Guide for estimating volume of incontinent urine: 
a. Urine volume can be estimated from the size of 
the wet area on the linen: 
9in. diameter - 50-75 ml. 
12in. diameter - 100-125ml. 
18in. diameter - 150-175ml. 
 
24in. diameter - 200-300ml. 
b. These estimates vary depending on the type of 
linen. For instance: the stain on a thick diaper will 
be smaller than one on a thin sheet. 
Vital Signs: 
1. Temperature: febrile - have a fever; afebrile - not 
having a fever. 
2. Pulse: strong and regular - good force, even rhythm; 
weak and regular- poor force, even rhythm; thready - 
very weak force, usually irregular; irregular - rhythm 
uneven. 
3. Respirations: regular - both in depth and rate; shallow - 
little air taken in; deep - lots of air taken in; irregular - 
rhythm uneven, depth varies; Cheyne-Stokes (often 
seen as death approaches) - uneven rhythm, uneven 
rate, periods of no breathing; dyspneic - labored or 
difficult, usually with pain; orthopneic - ability to breathe 
only in upright position. 
4. Blood pressure: strong - good volume, easy to hear; 
weak - poor volume, distant or hard to hear; 
hypertension - abnormally high blood pressure; 
hypotension - abnormally low blood pressure. 
5. Pain: patient self-reports using pain scale. 
Oxygen: 
1. Note the exact times the patient is on or off oxygen. 
2. Note how the oxygen is being administered; through 
mask, cannula, catheter, or tent. 
3. Note number of liters flow meter is set: for example 4 
liters. 
4. Chart patient’s condition and comfort level. 
5. Chart care given to prevent irritation to skin, nose, and 
mouth. 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 21 of 21 
Module 15: Observations and Charting Handout 15.8- Charting Guides 
 
 
 
 
Death: 
1. Record the exact time of death and what you observed. 
Postmortem Care: 
1. Record time and date the body was taken to the 
morgue or by undertaker. Record what was done with 
the patient’s valuables, and have a witness to this co- 
sign with you.