Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 1 of 31 
 
 
Module 11: Nutrition 
Minimum Number of Theory Hours: 2 
Recommended Clinical Hours: 6 
 
Statement of Purpose: 
The purpose of this unit is to examine the body’s need for food and the effect of food on the body. This module includes the basic 
food groups, nutrients, and common therapeutic diets, as well as ways to assist a patient/resident to meet nutrition and hydration 
needs. 
 
Terminology: 
 
1. Allergy 19. Emesis 38. Mechanical soft diet 
2. American Dietetic Association 20. Enteral feeding 39. Mineral 
 (ADA) 21. Essential nutrient 40. Nasogastric tube 
3. Amino acid 22. Exchange list 41. Nutrient 
4. Anorexia 23. Expectorate 42. Nutrition 
5. Aspiration 24. Fats 43. Over-hydration 
6. Bland diet 25. Fiber 44. Parenteral nutrition 
7. Carbohydrate 26. Fluid 45. Percutaneous endoscopic 
8. Cellulose 27. Force fluids gastrostomy tube (PEG) 
9. Cholesterol 28. Full liquid diet 46. Pocketing 
10. Clear liquid diet 29. Gastrostomy tube 47. Protein 
11. Clothes protector 30. Gavage 48. Pureed diet 
12. Dehydration 31. Graduate 49. Restrict fluid 
13. Diaphoresis 32. Hydration 50. Soft diet 
14. Dietician 33. Hyperalimentation 51. Therapeutic diet 
15. Digestion 34. Intake & output (I&O) 52. Thickened liquid 
16. Diuresis 35. Intravenous infusion 53. Total Parenteral Nutrition (TPN) 
17. Dysphagia 36. Low fat diet 54. Vitamin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18. Edema 37. Low sodium diet 
 
 
 
Patient, resident, and client are synonymous 
terms referring to the person receiving care
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 2 of 31 
 
 
Patient, resident, and client are synonymous terms referring to the person receiving care 
 
Performance Standards (Objectives): 
Upon completion of two (2) hours of class plus homework assignments and six (6) hours of clinical experience, the learner will be 
able to: 
1. Define key terminology 
2. Discuss the body’s need for food and fluids 
3. List common nutrients and their food sources 
4. Describe the My Pyramid food guidance system 
5. Describe the vegan basic four food groups 
6. Discuss nutritional and fluid needs of the elderly 
7. Describe therapeutic diets commonly ordered for patients/residents and the responsibilities of the Nurse Assistant 
8. Describe proper techniques for feeding patients/residents 
9. Discuss cultural and religious influences on dietary practices 
10. Identify alternative ways to administer nutrition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 3 of 31 
 
 
 
References: 
1. Acello, B. & Hegner, B. (2016). Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage Learning. 
2. Acello, B. (2016). Workbook to accompany: Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage 
Learning 
3. Carter, P. J. (2017). Lippincott Essentials for Nursing Assistants: a Humanistic Approach to Caregiving. (4th ed.) Philadelphia, 
PA. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 
4. Deck, M. L. (2004). Instant Teaching Tools for the New Millennium. St Louis, MO. Mosby 
5. Hedman, S. A., Fuzy, J., & Rymer, S. (2018). Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque, NM. 
Hartman Publishing, Inc. 
6. Hartman Publishing. (2018). Workbook for Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque, NM. 
Hartman Publishing, Inc. 
7. Haroun, L. & Royce, S. (2004). Teaching Ideas and Activities for Health Care. Albany, NY. Delmar Publishers 
8. Pearson Vue (2018) California Nurse Assistant Candidate Handbook for National Nurse Aide Assessment Program. Philadelphia, 
PA. Pearson Education, Inc. 
9. Sorrentino, S. A., Remmert, L., & and Kelly, R. (2018) Workbook and Competency Evaluation Review for Moby’s Textbook for 
Nursing Assistants (9th ed.) St. Louis, MO. Mosby Company 
10. Sorrentino, S.A. and Remmert, L. (2018) Mosby’s Textbook for Nursing Assistants. (9th ed.). St Louis, MO. Elsevier 
11. Weaver, L. & Wilding, M. (2013) The Dimensions of Engaged Teaching: a Practical Guide for Educators. Bloomington, IN.

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 4 of 31 
 
 
 
 
Content Outline 
Recommended Teaching 
Strategies and 
Assignments 
Clinical Demonstration/ 
Method of Evaluation 
Objective 1 
Define Key Terminology. 
A. Review the terms listed in the terminology section 
B. Spell the listed terms accurately 
C. Pronounce the terms correctly 
D. Use the terms in their proper context 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Games: word searches, 
crossword puzzles, 
Family Feud, Jeopardy, 
bingo, spelling bee, 
hangman, and 
concentration 
C. Encourage use of 
internet, medical 
dictionary, and 
textbooks 
D. Create flashcards for 
learning purposes 
E. Handout 11.1a- Nutrition 
Crossword Puzzle 
F. Handout 11.1b- Nutrition 
Crossword Puzzle KEY 
 
 
A. Have students select 
five words from the list 
of key terminology and 
write a sentence for 
each defining the term 
B. Administer vocabulary 
pre-test and post-test 
C. Uses appropriate 
terminology when 
charting and reporting to 
licensed personnel 
Objective 2 
Discuss the body’s need for food and fluids. 
A. The body depends upon foods and fluids to 
1. Provide energy for daily living and bodily functions 
2. Promote growth and repair of tissue 
3. Provide necessary substances for regulation of bodily 
functions 
4. Meet a basic physiological need for survival 
B. Nutrition is the science of food and its relationship to health 
C. A balanced diet is 
1. Essential to good health 
Composed of sufficient nutrients to meet the body’s daily 
requirements 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Have students share 
their beliefs about 
nutrition and 
malnutrition 
 
 
A. Written test 
 
 
 

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 5 of 31 
 
 
 
3. Sufficient in amount of fluids (approximately 1500 milliliters 
per day minimum for an adult) 
 
Objective 3 
List common nutrients and their food sources. 
A. Nutrients, their food sources, and functions 
1. Carbohydrates 
a. Grains, pastas, breads, cereals, fruits, vegetables 
b. Main source of energy 
c. Provides dietary fiber 
2. Proteins 
a. Eggs, milk, meat, fish, nuts, poultry, cheese, beans, 
peanut butter, and soy products 
b. Essential for tissue growth and repair 
c. Made up of amino acids 
3. Fats 
a. Oils, milk, cream, cheese, meat, fats, butter, mayonnaise 
b. Provide energy, carry vitamins, conserve body heat, and 
protect internal organs 
4. Vitamins 
a. Found in almost all foods, especially vegetables and fruits 
b. Do not contain calories 
c. Essential for building and repairing body tissues, assisting 
in regulation of body functions 
5. Minerals 
a. Found in almost all foods 
b. Do not contain calories 
c. Essential for regulation of body functions, building and 
repairing body tissue 
6. Dietary fiber 
a. Raw fruits and vegetables, whole grain breads and 
cereals 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Handout 11.3a-Food 
Content Exercise 
C. Handout 11.3b- Food 
Content Exercise KEY 
D. Have student bring in 
empty, labeled food 
containers. Review 
labels, identifying 
nutrients and calories 
per container and per 
serving 
 
 
A. Written test 
 
 

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 6 of 31 
 
 
 
b. Provides bulk to assist in maintaining normal bowel 
elimination 
7. Fluids 
a. Water, juices, other beverages 
b. May or may not provide calories and nutrients 
c. Water is essential for normal body functioning 
d. All chemical reactions in the body take place in water 
 
Objective 4 
Describe the My Plate food guidance system. 
A. Grain Group 
1. Whole grain bread, cereal, crackers, rice and pasta group 
2. Minimum 5-6 ounces/day (women), 6-8 ounces/day (men) 
B. Vegetable Group 
1. Eat more dark green and orange vegetables, dry beans and 
peas 
2. Minimum 2-2 ½ cups/day (women), 2 ½-3 cups (men) 
C. Fruit Group 
1. Fresh, frozen, canned or dried fruits 
2. Limit fruit juices 
3. Minimum 1 ½-2 cups/day (women), 2 cups (men) 
D. Dairy Group 
1. Milk, yogurt, cheese 
2. Choose low fat or non-fat 
3. Minimum 3 cups/day (women and men) 
E. Protein 
1. Meat, poultry, fish, dry beans, eggs, and nuts 
2. Minimum 5-5 ½ ounces/day (women), 5 ½-6 ½ ounces/day 
(men) 
F. Oil Group 
1. Make most oil choices from fish, nuts and vegetable oil 
2. Limit solid fats such as butter, lard, and shortening 
3. 5-6 teaspoons/day (women), 6-7 teaspoons/day (men) 
 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Internet Activity: Go to 
http://www.choosemypla 
te.gov/ for resources to 
download 
C. Assignment: Have 
students keep a food 
journal, listing all food 
and fluids taken in over 
a 24 hour period. Do 
this for one weekday 
and one weekend day 
 Compare diets for 
the two days 
 Use 
http://www.choose 
myplate.gov/ 
website to identify 
categories of food 
 Comment on what 
influenced diet 
choices, desired 
changes, and ideas 
for making 
changes 
 
 
A. Written test 

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 7 of 31 
 
 
 
Objective 5 
Describe the vegan basic four food groups. 
A. Vegetarian diet 
1. Excludes meat including game and slaughter by-products; 
fish, shellfish and other sea animals; poultry 
2. Variations may include or exclude milk, fish, eggs, and honey 
B. Vegan diet excludes all animal products including milk, fish, eggs 
and honey 
C. The vegan basic four food groups 
1. Whole grains – 5 or more servings each day 
2. Vegetables – 3 or more servings each day 
3. Fruits – 3 or more servings each day 
4. Legumes – 2-3 servings each day 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Handout 11.5 - Vegan 
Diet 
 
 
A. Written test 
Objective 6 
Discuss nutritional and fluid needs of the elderly. 
A. Age-related changes affecting nutritional needs of the elderly 
1. Fewer calories may be needed if patient/resident is less active 
2. Additional vitamins and minerals may be required due to 
digestive disturbances 
3. Medications may interfere with fluid balance, digestion and 
nutrient use 
4. Poor oral hygiene, loss of teeth, and ill-fitting dentures may 
lead to poor nutrition 
5. Ability to taste foods may be diminished 
6. Many common diseases interfere with eating and/or the ability 
to use nutrients 
7. Social isolation may interfere with appetite and the body’s 
utilization of nutrients 
8. A patient/resident may need nutritional supplements (such as 
Ensure or Boost) one to three times a day to meet daily 
nutrient requirements 
B. Specific food allergies 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Identify and discuss 
common food and food 
allergies 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Identifies specific 
patients/residents 
experiencing age-
related changes in 
nutritional needs and 
reports to licensed 
nurse 
C. Reports specific 
allergies to licensed 
nurse 
 

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 8 of 31 
 
 
 
1. Know patient’s/resident’s allergies 
2. Check every tray served 
3. Check for new allergies 
4. Check for food additive allergies such as peanuts, shellfish, 
and wheat 
5. Check for lactose intolerance 
C. Factors affecting patient’s/resident’s food choices 
1. Likes and dislikes 
2. Facility food service menus and options 
3. Medical restrictions 
4. Culture 
5. Religious beliefs 
 
Objective 7 
Describe therapeutic diets commonly ordered for 
patients/residents and the responsibilities of the Nurse 
Assistant. 
A. Therapeutic (special) diets most commonly ordered 
1. Low sodium 
2. Diabetic 
3. Low fat 
4. Low cholesterol 
5. Liquid 
a. Clear Liquid 
b. Full liquid 
c. Thickened liquids 
1) Nectar thick 
2) Honey thick 
6. Bland 
B. Special consistency 
1. Mechanical soft; prepared to require very little chewing 
2. Pureed; food that has been processed in a blender for easier 
swallowing and digestion. Requires little to no chewing 
3. Soft; liquid or semi-solid foods that are easily digested 
 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Create a Jeopardy 
Game using content 
items from previous 
objectives 
C. Review foods and fluids 
allowed and restricted 
on each therapeutic diet 
D. Discuss the nutritional 
adequacy of each 
therapeutic diet 
E. Arrange conference with 
Speech Therapy and 
Occupational Therapy to 
discuss services 
 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Correctly identify all 
patients/residents, 
check diet card for 
name, diet order, 
specific instructions 
and allergies 
C. Accurately record all 
patient/resident food 
and fluid intake 
D. Reports significant 
changes in 
patient’s/resident’s 
dietary habits to licensed 
nurse 
 

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 9 of 31 
 
 
 
C. Responsibilities of the Nurse Assistant 
1. Make sure all patients/residents receive their ordered diet 
2. Check arm bands against names on trays at each meal 
3. Report any problems related to diet such as food or liquid 
preferences, difficulty chewing or swallowing, nausea or 
vomiting, anorexia, food intolerances 
4. Open containers on tray as needed 
5. Assist nurses, dieticians, and physicians in evaluating fluid 
balance through accurate monitoring and documentation of 
intake and output 
6. Calculate and record food intake according to facility 
guidelines 
7. Determine reason for any tray or food refusal, offer alternates 
as allowed 
8. If alternate is refused, report refusal to licensed nurse 
9. Do not offer extra food or condiments without checking with 
licensed nurse 
10. Serve hot foods hot and cold foods cold 
11. Do not mix pureed foods 
12. Always check trays to monitor percentage of diet eaten 
13. Always have patient/resident in an upright position 
when eating unless otherwise ordered 
 
Objective 8 
Describe proper techniques for feeding patients/residents. 
A. Proper techniques for feeding patients/residents 
1. Provide a comfortable and enjoyable atmosphere 
a. Sit at patient’s/resident’s eye level 
b. Maintain a positive attitude when assisting 
patient/resident with feeding 
c. Encourage patients/residents to participate as able (holding 
bread, picking up juice cup, moving fork to mouth after food 
is put on it) 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Activity: Have students 
feed each other and 
simulate sensory 
impairments by wearing 
a blindfold, applying light 
coat of Vaseline to eye 
glasses, or placing 
cotton in ears. Then 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Identify symbols used to 
identify high risk 
patients/residents 
C. Utilizes proper feeding 
techniques for 
patient/resident with or 
without difficulty 
swallowing 
 

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 10 of 31 
 
 
 
 
d. Allow patient/resident to set the pace as much as possible 
e. Do not rush 
2. Provide assistance as needed using adaptive equipment as 
indicated 
3. Serve patients/residents in their rooms if unable to join other 
patients/residents in the dining area 
4. Serve patients/residents in dining room if at all possible 
5. Alternate liquids and solid foods 
6. Check swallowing before patient/resident eats or is fed 
7. Feed by placing food on unaffected side if applicable 
B. Prevention of choking 
1. Identify patients/residents who are at high risk for 
dysphagia and choking 
a. Cerebrovascular accident (stroke) 
b. Neurological disease 
c. Trauma to head, neck, or throat 
d. Dementia 
2. Supervise closely when eating 
3. Follow patient’s/resident’s individual feeding plans 
4. Cut food into small pieces, offer in small amounts, wait until 
each portion is chewed and swallowed before more is given 
5. Notify licensed nurse if signs of dysphagia are observed 
a. Long intervals before swallowing 
b. Swallowing several times with each bite 
c. Frequent throat clearing 
d. Difficulty handling foods and fluids in mouth 
e. Wet gurgling voice 
f. Pocketing food 
g. Excessive drooling 
h. Patient/resident feels that food is sticking in mouth or throat 
6. Proceed at the patient’s/resident’s pace. Do not rush 
7. Keep patient/resident in an upright position during and 30 
minutes 
change roles 
C. Discuss the impact of 
sensory deprivation on 
appetite and enjoyment, 
the experience of 
feeding and being fed, if 
the feeder followed 
proper techniques 
D. Suggest using individual 
containers of pudding, 
Jello or yogurt 
E. Practice can also 
include liquids with and 
without straws 
F. Manual Skill 11.8a- 
Preparing the 
Patient/resident for 
Meal time 
G. Manual Skill 11.8b- 
Feeding a 
Patient/resident Who 
Cannot Feed Self 
H. Manual Skill 11.8c- 
Assisting the 
Patient/resident Who 
Can Feed Self 
I. Review Manual Skill 
12.4; Choking Victim- 
Conscious and 
Unconscious 
 
 
 

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 11 of 31 
 
 
 
after eating 
8. Sit at eye level while feeding a patient/resident 
9. Thicken liquids if patient/resident has difficulty 
swallowing (as ordered) 
10. Assist patient/resident in using appropriate adaptive equipment 
C. Recognition of signs of choking 
1. Universal sign of choking is hand(s) to throat 
2. Inability to speak, cough or breathe 
3. Cyanosis, especially of lips, skin, nails 
4. Loss of consciousness 
 
Objective 9 
Discuss cultural and religious influences on dietary practices. 
A. Dietary practices affiliated with religions and/or cultures 
B. Ask all patients/residents if they have any food preferences 
C. Ask family of non-communicative patients/residents 
about food preferences 
D. If allowed, encourage family to bring in ethnic and cultural foods 
E. Avoid making assumptions regarding food likes and dislikes 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. List and discuss current 
knowledge of cultural 
and religious influences 
on dietary practices 
C. Ask students to search 
internet and share 
resources with the class 
D. Activity: Plan a potluck 
of various ethnic foods 
and share recipes 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Ask patient/resident 
about food preferences 
and practices. 
Document and report 
appropriately 
Objective 10 
Identify alternative ways to administer nutrition. 
A. Tube feedings 
1. Ordered by the doctor when a patient/resident is unable to eat 
2. Started by a licensed nurse 
3. Nurse Assistant’s responsibility 
a. Monitor for pressure on or kinking of tubing 
b. Monitor the level of feeding and report when low 
c. Keep head of bed elevated at least 20– 30at all times 
d. Do not lower bed even when repositioning patient/resident 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Show samples of tube 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Observe and record 
intake from a gastric 
tube feeding 
 

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 12 of 31 
 
 
 
e. Never turn off pump; notify licensed nurse of alarm 
f. Notify licensed nurse of signs or symptoms of aspiration 
B. Intravenous infusion 
1. Ordered by the physician 
2. Started and monitored by a licensed nurse according to facility 
policy 
3. Nurse Assistant’s responsibility 
a. Make sure there are no kinks, twisting, pressure or 
obstruction of IV tubing 
b. Report the following 
1) Alarm ringing on IV 
2) Complaints of pain or burning at the IV site 
3) Swelling or redness at the IV site 
4) Fever 
5) Difficulty breathing 
6) Bleeding or leakage of fluid at the IV site 
7) Disconnected IV tubing 
8) Empty IV fluid container 
c. Nurse Assistant should never adjust or turn off IV 
monitoring equipment 
d. Make sure patient/resident and family do not handle, 
adjust, or stop infusion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 13 of 31 
 
 
Sample Test: Module 11- Nutrition 
 
1. How much fluid should the average adult take in each day? 
A. 800 ounces 
B. 1,500 milliliters 
C. 2,500 milliliters 
D. 4,000 milliliters 
 
2. Liquid nutritional supplements are offered: 
A. Between meals 
B. To anyone who wants them 
C. Warm 
D. On meal trays 
 
3. Approximately how much daily urine output is normal for an average adult? 
A. 800 ounces 
B. 1,500 milliliters 
C. 2,500 milliliters 
D. 4,000 milliliters 
 
4. Accurate recording of fluid intake includes: 
A. Only the fluid given in the patient’s/resident’s room 
B. Only the fluid that the nurse gives with medicine 
C. Only the fluid that comes on the dietary tray 
D. All fluid the patient/resident consumes during a shift 
 
5. Which abbreviation is used most frequently to measure fluid intake and output? 
A. ml. 
B. kg. 
C. cm. 
D. mmHg. 

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 14 of 31 
 
 
 
6. After totaling the intake and output at the end of a shift, the Nurse Assistant realizes that a patient’s/resident’s intake is 1200 
milliliters and output is 325 milliliters. What is the best action for the Nurse Assistant at this time? 
A. Record this information on the appropriate form 
B. Re-total the intake and output because it is probably an error 
C. Report the information to the charge nurse 
D. Offer the patient/resident additional fluids 
 
7. A patient/resident has a gastrostomy tube. The Nurse Assistant knows that this is: 
A. A tube inserted through the nose to the stomach for feeding 
B. The same as total parenteral nutrition (TPN) 
C. A tube inserted through the abdominal wall into the stomach for feeding 
D. A tube that introduces high-density nutrients into a large vein 
 
8. When caring for a patient/resident who receives tube feedings the Nurse Assistant must always: 
A. Elevate the head while the feeding is infusing 
B. Change the bag at the end of a shift 
C. Check the placement of the tube 
D. Position the patient/resident in the orthopneic position for each feeding 
 
9. Which of the following is included in a clear liquid diet? 
A. Chicken noodle soup 
B. Liquid nutritional supplement 
C. Flavored gelatin 
D. Milk 
 
10. Why is accurate recording of the food consumption of a patient/resident with diabetes important? 
A. Diet and insulin must balance to maintain a healthy protein level 
B. A diabetic patient/resident should not consume more than 2,600 calories per day 
C. The diabetic diet may be balanced by insulin or diabetic medications 
D. Diabetics must consume an adequate amount of sugar at each meal

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 15 of 31 
 
 
 
11. A sign that states NPO is posted on the door of a patient/resident. This means that the patient/resident should: 
A. Not be fed 
B. Not have physical and occupational therapies 
C. Have intake only through a nasogastric or gastrostomy tube 
D. Have nothing by mouth 
 
12. A patient/resident has to order “Force Fluids.” What is the best way to follow this order? 
A. Force the patient/resident to drink a glass of water every hour 
B. Encourage the patient/resident to take in as much fluid as possible 
C. Force the patient/resident to drink 8-10 glasses of water every day 
D. Encourage the patient/resident to drink only water 
 
13. What action is essential before serving a meal tray to a patient/resident? 
A. Check the diet card and patient/resident identification 
B. Wash hands and put on a hairnet 
C. Have the patient/resident go to the bathroom and wash hands 
D. Put on a pair of gloves 
 
14. Hot liquids are best tested by: 
A. Inserting a thermometer into the center of the liquid 
B. Placing a few drops of liquid on the patient’s/resident’s wrist 
C. Placing a few drops of liquid on the Nurse Assistant’s wrist 
D. Touching the outside of the dish or cup 
 
15. When feeding a patient/resident who has had a stroke the Nurse Assistant will most correctly: 
A. Place food as far back on the tongue as possible 
B. Place food in the unaffected side of the mouth 
C. Place food in the affected side of the mouth 
D. Place food on the center of the tongue 

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 16 of 31 
 
 
 
16. A sign of dysphagia is: 
A. Shallow respirations 
B. Difficulty breathing 
C. Difficulty swallowing liquids 
D. Difficulty speaking 
 
17. Food thickeners are designed to: 
A. Slow food intake into the mouth 
B. Slow the movement of fluids through the esophagus 
C. Provide a thicker mass for swallowing to help prevent choking 
D. Increase the number of calories the patient/resident consumes 
 
18. While feeding a patient/resident, a Nurse Assistant is observed doing all the following actions. Which of the following is not correct? 
A. Standing at eye level 
B. Alternating liquid and solid food 
C. Only using a spoon for solids 
D. Feeding the patient/resident in his room 
 
19. The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) includes all of the following requirements for food served in long-term care 
facilities except: 
A. Food must smell and taste good 
B. A patient/resident must receive at least three meals a day 
C. Hot food must be served hot, and cold food must be served cold 
D. Special eating equipment and utensils must be provided by the patient/resident or family 
 
20. A patient/resident with a feeding tube is usually: 
A. On a regular liquid diet 
B. In a terminal condition 
C. Not allowed food or liquids by mouth (NPO) 
D. Receiving an intravenous infusion (IV) 

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 17 of 31 
 
 
21. A patient/resident begins to cough during lunch in the dining room. No licensed nurses are in the room. Upon observing this, the 
Nurse Assistant will first: 
A. Place the patient/resident on the floor and open the airway 
B. Raise the patient’s/resident’s arms over their head 
C. Offer the patient/resident a glass of water 
D. Ask the patient/resident if they can speak 
 
Matching: Match the following definitions with the correct term. 
 
A. Difficulty Swallowing 
B. Process of converting food into a form that can be used 
by the body 
C. Excessive water loss 
D. Process by which the body uses food for growth and 
repair and to maintain health 
E. Substance that causes sensitivity 
F. Vomit 
 
22. Allergen 
23. Dehydration 
24. Digestion 
25. Dysphagia 
26. Emesis 
27. Nutrition 

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 18 of 31 
 
 
 
 
28. A patient/resident was served the foods seen here. The patient/resident ate all of the cereal, one slice of bread and butter, and 
drank all of the milk. Approximately what percentage of the breakfast was eaten? 
A. 25% 
B. 50% 
C. 75% 
D. 100%

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 19 of 31 
 
 
 
Sample Test Answers: Module 11 
 
1. B 
2. A 
3. B 
4. D 
5. A 
6. C 
7. C 
8. A 
9. C 
10. C 
11. D 
12. B 
13. A 
14. C 
15. B 
16. C 
17. C 
18. A 
19. D 
20. C 
21. D 
22. E 
23. C 
24. B 
25. A 
26. F 
27. D 
28. B 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 20 of 31 
Module 11: Nutrition Manual Skills 11.8a: Preparing the Patient/resident for 
Mealtime 
 
 
 
MANUAL SKILL: Preparing the Patient/resident for Mealtime 
 
EQUIPMENT: 
 
Bedpan/urinal if needed 
Clothes protector 
Food tray 
Soap and water if needed 
Tooth brush and Toothpaste 
Towel 
Washcloth 
 
BEGINNING STEPS: 
 
1. Wash hands. 
2. Knock and pause before entering the patient’s/resident’s room. 
3. Introduce self. 
4. Identify patient/resident. 
5. Explain procedure to patient speaking clearly, slowly, and directly. Maintain face to face contact whenever possible. 
6. Gather equipment. 
7. Provide for privacy with a curtain, screen, or door. 
8. Wear gloves due to contact with body secretions. 
 
SKILL STEPS: 
 
1. Offer bedpan or assist patient/resident to bathroom. 
2. Provide water, soap, and towel to wash hands and face. 
3. Provide oral hygiene. 
4. Encourage patient/resident to join other patients/residents for dining experience. 
5. Clear and wipe off overbed table, if patient/resident will stay in room. 
6. Remove unpleasant items from patient’s/resident’s sight. 
7. Be sure patient/resident is in a safe and upright position. 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 21 of 31 
Module 11: Nutrition Manual Skills 11.8a: Preparing the Patient/resident for 
Mealtime 
 
 
 
 
ENDING STEPS: 
 
1. Clean and return equipment and supplies, if applicable. 
2. Remove gloves (without contaminating self) into waste container and wash hands. 
3. Position patient/resident comfortably. 
4. Place call light within reach. 
5. Lower bed to safe position for the patient/resident. 
6. Leave room neat. 
7. Wash hands. 
8. Document. 
9. Report abnormal findings to licensed nurse. 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 22 of 31 
Module 11: Nutrition Manual Skills 11.8b: Feeds Patient/resident who Cannot 
Feed Self 
 
 
 
MANUAL SKILLS: Feed Patient/resident Who Cannot Feed Self 
 
Equipment: 
 
Bedpan/urinal if needed 
Food and beverage tray 
Hand wipes 
Silverware 
Soap and water if needed 
Tooth brush and toothpaste 
 
Beginning Steps: 
 
1. Wash hands. 
2. Knock and pause before entering the patient’s/resident’s room. 
3. Introduce self. 
4. Identify patient/resident. 
5. Gather equipment, if applicable. 
6. Provide for privacy with a curtain, door, or screen. 
 
Skill Steps: 
 
1. Explain procedure speaking clearly, slowly, and directly. Maintain face-to-face contact whenever possible. 
2. Before feeding, look at name card on tray and ask patient/resident to state name. 
3. Before feeding, position patient/resident in an upright sitting position (75-90 degrees). 
4. Places tray where it can be easily seen by patient/resident. 
5. Candidate cleans patient’s/resident’s hands with hand wipe before beginning feeding. 
6. Candidate sits facing patient/resident during feeding. 
7. Tells patient/resident what foods are on the tray and asks what patient/resident would like to eat first. 
8. Using spoon, offers patient/resident one bite of each type of food on tray, telling patient/resident the content of each spoonful. 
9. Offers beverage at least once during meal. 
10. Candidate asks patient/resident if they are ready for next bite of food or sip of beverage. 
11. At end of meal, candidate cleans patient’s/resident’s mouth and hands with wipes. 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 23 of 31 
Module 11: Nutrition Manual Skills 11.8b: Feeds Patient/resident who Cannot 
Feed Self 
 
 
 
12. Removes food tray and places tray in designated dirty supply area. 
13. Signaling device is within patient’s/resident’s reach. 
14. After completing skill, washes hands. 
 
Ending Steps: 
 
1. Clean and return equipment and supplies, if applicable. 
2. Position patient/resident comfortably. 
3. Lower bed to safe position for the patient/resident. 
4. Leave room neat. 
5. Wash hands. 
6. Document. 
7. Report abnormal findings to licensed nurse. 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 24 of 31 
Module 11: Nutrition Manual Skills 11.8c: Assisting the Patient/resident Who Can 
Feed Self 
 
 
 
MANUAL SKILL: Assisting the Patient/resident Who Can Feed Self 
 
EQUIPMENT: 
 
Bedpan/urinal if needed 
Clothing protector 
Food tray 
Soap and water if needed 
Tooth brush and toothpaste 
Towel 
Washcloth 
 
BEGINNING STEPS: 
 
1. Wash hands. 
2. Knock and pause before entering the patient’s/resident’s room. 
3. Introduce self. 
4. Identify patient/resident. 
5. Explain procedure speaking clearly, slowly, and directly. Maintain face-to-face contact whenever possible. 
6. Gather equipment, if applicable. 
7. Provide for privacy with a curtain, door, or screen. 
8. Apply gloves (standard precautions). 
 
 
SKILL STEPS: 
 
1. Wash hands. 
2. Check diet card for name of patient/resident, diet order, special instructions, and allergies. 
3. Make sure food on tray matches information on diet card. 
4. Remove tray from food cart and make sure all necessary items are there such as silverware, napkins, salt and pepper if allowed. 
5. Take tray to patient’s/resident’s room as quickly as possible to ensure that food is served at the appropriate temperatures. 
6. Knock and pause before entering room. 
7. Introduce self. 
8. Verify patient’s/resident’s name by checking the armband against the name printed on the diet card. 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 25 of 31 
Module 11: Nutrition Manual Skills 11.8c: Assisting the Patient/resident Who Can 
Feed Self 
 
 
 
9. Explain procedure. 
10. Lower one side rail if permitted. 
11. Raise head of bed to semi Fowler’s or higher position or assist to chair. 
12. Place tray on overbed table in front of patient/resident. 
13. Remove plate covers. 
14. Arrange dishes and silverware for ease of use by patient/resident. 
15. Arrange plate so that main entree is closest to the patient/resident. 
16. Observe and provide whatever assistance the patient/resident needs by cutting meat, buttering bread, pouring liquids, and 
opening packets, use adaptive devices per patient’s/resident’s individual needs. 
17. Encourage patient/resident to do as much as possible for him or herself. 
18. Make sure patient/resident does not need more assistance before leaving room. 
19. Return to patient’s/resident’s room periodically during mealtime to check on patient’s/resident’s progress. 
20. Encourage patient/resident to eat all of diet served. 
21. Talk with patient/resident and encourage socialization with other patients/residents. 
22. Remove tray when patient/resident is finished. 
23. Clean overbed table and return to position desired by patient/resident. 
24. Raise side rail. 
 
ENDING STEPS: 
 
1. Clean and return equipment and supplies, if applicable. 
2. Remove gloves (without contaminating self) into waste container and wash hands. 
3. Position patient/resident comfortably. 
4. Place call light within reach. 
5. Lower bed to safe position for the patient/resident. 
6. Leave room neat. 
7. Wash hands. 
8. Document percentage of soiled food intake, milliliters of fluid intake, and tolerance of procedure. 
9. Report abnormal findings to licensed nurse. 

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum 
- Revised December 2018 
 
Page 26 of 31 
 
 
 
 
 

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum 
- Revised December 2018 
 
Page 27 of 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Module 11: Nutrition 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum 
- Revised December 2018 
 
Page 28 of 31 
 
 
 
 
 

Module 11: Nutrition Handout 11.3a- Food Content Exercise 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 29 of 31 
 
 
 
Food Content Exercise 
 
Directions: Label food items as protein, carbohydrate, fat, or combination of the above. 
 
 
1. Pork chop 
2. Pot pie 
3. Lettuce 
4. Apple pie 
5. Green beans 
6. Tortilla 
7. Cupcakes 
8. Taco 
9. Banana 
10. Rice 
11. Potatoes 
12. Green onions 
13. Bread 
14. Ice cream 
15. Meatloaf 
16. Onion 
17. Strawberries 
18. Beets 
19. Pudding 
20. Grapes 
21. Turkey 
22. Egg 
23. Jello 
24. Bean sprout 
25. Enchilada 
26. Roll 
27. Broccoli 
28. Shrimp/lobster 
29. Hamburger 
30. Meatloaf 
31. Chop suey 
32. Chicken 
33. Pasta 
34. Ceaser salad 
35. Spaghetti 
36. Tomatoes 
37. Ham 
38. Grilled cheese 
39. Lasagna 
40. Pear 
41. Carrot 
42. Fish 
43. Beef stew 
44. Cake 
45. Bacon 
46. Macaroni and cheese 
47. Waldorf salad 
48. Pizza 
49. Apple 
50. Cauliflower 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 30 of 31 
Module 11: Nutrition Handout 11.3b- Food Content Exercise KEY 
 
 
 
Food Content Exercise-KEY 
Directions: Label food items as protein, carbohydrate, fat, or combination of the above. 
51. Pork chop: Protein, fat 
52. Pot pie: Protein, Carbohydrate, fat 
53. Lettuce: Carbohydrate 
54. Apple pie: Carbohydrate, fat 
55. Green beans: Carbohydrate 
56. Tortilla: Carbohydrate, fat 
57. Cupcakes : Carbohydrate, fat 
58. Taco: Protein, Carbohydrate, fat 
59. Banana: Carbohydrate 
60. Rice: Carbohydrate 
61. Potatoes: Carbohydrate 
62. Green onions: Carbohydrate 
63. Bread : Carbohydrate 
64. Ice cream: Protein, Carbohydrate, fat 
65. Meatloaf: Protein, fat 
66. Onion: Carbohydrate 
67. Strawberries: Carbohydrate 
68. Beets: Carbohydrate 
69. Pudding: Protein, Carbohydrate, fat 
70. Grapes: Carbohydrate 
71. Turkey: Protein, Fat 
72. Egg: Protein, fat 
73. Jello: Carbohydrate 
74. Bean sprout : Carbohydrate 
75. Enchilada: Protein, Carbohydrate, fat 
76. Roll: Carbohydrate 
77. Broccoli: Carbohydrate 
78. Shrimp/lobster: Protein, fat 
79. Hamburger: Protein, fat 
80. Meatloaf: Protein, fat 
81. Chop suey: Protein, Carbohydrate, fat 
82. Chicken: Protein, fat 
83. Pasta: Carbohydrate 
84. Caeser salad: Carbohydrate, fat 
85. Spaghetti: Carbohydrate 
86. Tomatoes: Carbohydrate 
87. Ham: Protein, fat 
88. Grilled cheese: Protein, Carbohydrate, fat 
89. Lasagna: Protein, Carbohydrate, fat 
90. Pear: Carbohydrate 
91. Carrot: Carbohydrate 
92. Fish: Protein, fat 
93. Beef stew: Protein, Carbohydrate, fat 
94. Cake : Carbohydrate, fat 
95. Bacon: Protein, fat 
96. Macaroni and cheese: Protein, Carbohydrate, fat 
97. Waldorf salad: Carbohydrate, fat 
98. Pizza: Protein, Carbohydrate, fat 
99. Apple: Carbohydrate 
100. Cauliflower: Carbohydrate

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 31 of 31 
Module 11: Nutrition Handout 11.5: Vegan Diet- The New Four Food Groups 
 
 
 
 
 
Whole Grains: 
 
Vegan Diet 
The New Four Food Groups 
 This group includes bread, rice, pasta, hot or cold cereal, corn, millet, barley, bulgur, buckwheat groats and tortillas. Build 
each of your meals around heart grain dish. Whole grains are rich in fiber and other complex carbohydrates, as well as 
protein, B vitamins and zinc. 
Vegetables: 
 Vegetables are packed with nutrients. They provide vitamin C, beta-carotene, riboflavin and other vitamins, iron, calcium, and 
fiber. Dark green, leafy vegetables such as broccoli, collards, kale, mustard and turnip greens, chicory, or bok choy are 
especially good sources of these important nutrients. Dark yellow and orange vegetables such as carrots, winter squash, 
sweet potatoes and pumpkin provide extra beta-carotene. Include generous portions of a variety of vegetables on your diet. 
Legumes: 
 Legumes, which is another name for beans, peas, and lentils, are all good sources of fiber, protein, iron, calcium, zinc, and B 
vitamins. This group also includes chickpeas, baked and refried beans, soy milk, tofu, tempeh, and texturized vegetable 
protein. 
Fruits: 
 Fruits are rich in fiber, vitamin C and beta-carotene. Be sure to include at least one serving each day of fruits that are high in 
vitamin C; Citrus fruits, melons, and strawberries are all good choices. Choose whole fruit over fruit juices, which don’t 
contain as much healthy fiber. 
 
Food Group Number of Servings Serving Size 
Whole Grains 5 or more ½ cup hot cereal, 1oz. dry cereal, 1 slice 
of bread 
Vegetables 3 or more 1 cup raw, ½ cup cooked 
Legumes 2 or 3 8 oz soy milk 
Fruits 3 or more 1 medium piece of fruit, ½ cup cooked 
 fruit, 1.2 cup fruit juice