                                                                                                                               Module 10: Vital Signs

Module 10: Vital Signs
Minimum Number of Theory Hours: 3
Recommended Clinical Hours: 6

Statement of Purpose:
The purpose of this unit is to prepare students to know how, when and why vital signs are taken and how to report and chart these
procedures. Students will learn the correct procedure for measuring temperature, pulse, respirations, and blood pressure. They will
learn to recognize and report normal and abnormal findings.

Terminology:     Blood Pressure               Pulse              Respiration                                                   Pain (effects on
                                                                                                                               Vital signs)
  Temperature:   10. Aneroid manometer        22. Apical         33. Abdominal respirations
                 11. Bell                     23. Arrhythmia     34. Apnea                                                     46. Acute pain
  1. Afebrile    12. Diaphragm                24. Bounding       35. Bradypnea                                                 47. Chronic pain
  2. Axilla      13. Diastolic                25. Brachial       36. Cheyne-Stokes                                             48. Phantom pain
  3. Celsius     14. Hypertension             26. Bradycardia    37. Cyanosis                                                  49. Pain scales
  4. Fahrenheit  15. Hypotension              27. Carotid        38. Diaphragm
  5. Febrile     16. Orthostatic hypotension  28. Pulse deficit  39. Dyspnea
  6. Metabolism  17. Pre-hypertension         29. Radial         40. Labored respiration
  7. Mucosa      18. Pulse pressure           30. Rhythm         41. Orthopnea
  8. Pyrexia     19. Sphygmomanometer         31. Thready        42. Shallow respiration
  9. Tympanic    20. Stethoscope              32. Tachycardia    43. Stertorous
                 21. Systolic                                    44. Tachypnea
                                                                 45. Temperature, Pulse,

                                                                     Respiration (TPR)

 Patient, patient/resident,                                                                                                    Page 1 of 46
 and client are
 synonymous terms
CreaflieforrrinnigatoCothmempeurnsiotyn Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018
 receiving care
                                                                                                            Module 10: Vital Signs

Patient, resident, and client are synonymous terms referring to the person receiving care

Performance Standards (Objectives):

  Upon completion of three (3) hours of class plus homework assignments and six (6) hours of clinical experience, the student will be

  able to:

  1. Define key terminology
  2. Describe what is meant by vital signs, their purpose, and observations made while performing the procedures
  3. Discuss the use of temperature as an indicator of body function
  4. Describe nursing measures to raise and lower the temperature of the body
  5. Describe the circulatory system as it relates to pulse, and identify the pulse sites
  6. Describe factors that increase and decrease pulse, and the qualities to observe in taking a pulse
  7. Define and describe respiration and factors that affect respiratory rate
  8. Describe observations to be made when measuring respirations
  9. Describe abnormal breathing patterns
  10. Describe the process for taking TPR as a combined procedure
  11. Describe what happens in the circulatory system to produce blood pressure
  12. Identify factors that increase or decrease blood pressure
  13. Identify parts of the blood pressure equipment
  14. Discuss the procedure for taking a blood pressure reading
  15. Discuss observation and reporting of patient’s/resident’s pain
  16. Record vital signs on chart, graph, and Nursing Assistant notes

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 2 of 46
                                                                                                                                                        Module 10: Vital Signs
References:

    1. Acello, B. & Hegner, B. (2016). Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage Learning.
    2. Acello, B. (2016). Workbook to accompany: Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage

         Learning
    3. Carter, P. J. (2017). Lippincott Essentials for Nursing Assistants: a Humanistic Approach to Caregiving. (4th ed.) Philadelphia,

         PA. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
    4. Deck, M. L. (2004). Instant Teaching Tools for the New Millennium. St Louis, MO. Mosby
    5. Hedman, S. A., Fuzy, J., & Rymer, S. (2018). Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque, NM.

         Hartman Publishing, Inc.
    6. Hartman Publishing. (2018). Workbook for Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque, NM.

         Hartman Publishing, Inc.
    7. Haroun, L. & Royce, S. (2004). Teaching Ideas and Activities for Health Care. Albany, NY. Delmar Publishers
    8. Pearson Vue (2018) California Nurse Assistant Candidate Handbook for National Nurse Aide Assessment Program. Philadelphia,

         PA. Pearson Education, Inc.
    9. Sorrentino, S. A., Remmert, L., & and Kelly, R. (2018) Workbook and Competency Evaluation Review for Moby’s Textbook for

         Nursing Assistants (9th ed.) St. Louis, MO. Mosby Company
    10. Sorrentino, S.A. and Remmert, L. (2018) Mosby’s Textbook for Nursing Assistants. (9th ed.). St Louis, MO. Elsevier
    11. Weaver, L. & Wilding, M. (2013) The Dimensions of Engaged Teaching: a Practical Guide for Educators. Bloomington, IN.

         Solution Tree Press.

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 3 of 46
                                    Content Outline        Recommended Teaching                         Module 10: Vital Signs
                                                                  Strategies and
Objective 1                                                        Assignments                  Clinical Demonstration/
Define key terminology.                                                                          Method of Evaluation
A. Review the terms listed in the terminology section
B. Spell the listed terms accurately                       A. Lecture/Discussion                A. Have students select five
C. Pronounce the terms correctly                           B. Games: word searches,                 words from the list of key
D. Use the terms in their proper context                                                            terminology and write a
                                                               crossword puzzles,                   sentence for each
                                                               Family Feud, Jeopardy,               defining the term
                                                               bingo, spelling bee,
                                                               hangman, and                     B. Administer vocabulary
                                                               concentration                        pre-test and post-test
                                                           C. Encourage use of
                                                               internet, medical                C. Uses appropriate
                                                               dictionary, and                      terminology when
                                                               textbooks                            charting and reporting to
                                                           D. Create flashcards for                 licensed personnel
                                                               learning purposes
                                                           E. Handout 10.1a- Vital
                                                               Signs Crossword
                                                           F. Handout 10.1b- Vital
                                                               Signs Crossword KEY

Objective 2

Describe what is meant by vital signs, their purpose, and

observations made while performing the procedures.

A. Vital signs refer to the temperature, pulse, respirations, and blood A. Lecture/Discussion   A. Observe student
                                                           B. Demonstration and                     measuring vital signs
pressure
B. Pain, previously considered the 5th vital sign, has measurable effects return demonstration  B. Ask students what
                                                           C. Handout 10.2- Vital                   changes they would note
on vital signs depending on the type of pain                                                        in patient’s/resident’s
                                                           Signs Chart                              skin color, temperature,
1. Acute pain                                                                                       and behavior

2. Chronic pain

3. Phantom pain

4. Pain scales

C. Vital signs are indicators of body function

1. Assess body systems

2. Signify changes that are occurring in the body

D. Observations when taking vital signs include

1. Color and temperature of the skin

     2. Behavior of patient/resident                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 46
Calif3o.rnSiataCteommemnutsniftryomCotlhleegpeastiCenhta/rnecseidlloern’st oOf fhfiocwe NthuerysefeAesl,saisntdantht eMirodel Curriculum - Revised December 2018

comfort level (pain)
                                                                                                            Module 10: Vital Signs

Objective 3                                                               A. Lecture/Discussion        A. Written test
Discuss the use of temperature as an indication of body function.         B. Display all types of      B. Demonstrates accurate
A. Temperature
                                                                              thermometers                 measurement of
    1. Balance between heat gained and heat lost                          C. Ask students to identify      temperature by oral,
    2. The hypothalamus in the brain is the temperature regulation                                         axillary, temporal, and
                                                                              types                        rectal routes
         center                                                           D. Demonstration and         C. Demonstrates use of
B. Heat production. Heat is produced in our bodies by cellular activity,                                   mercury-free glass
                                                                              return demonstration         thermometer, electronic,
    food metabolism, muscle activity, and hormones                            with all types of            digital, tympanic, and
    1. Infection elevates temperature                                         thermometers as well as      temporal artery
    2. Brain injury can alter the temperature regulating center to            contraindications            thermometers
                                                                          E. Manual Skills10.3a- Oral  D. Reports abnormal
         either increase or decrease temperature                              Temperature                  temperature to nurse
    3. External factors can cause temperature elevation, such as, hot     F. Manual Skills 10.3b-
                                                                              Axillary Temperature
         drinks, hot air, warm clothing and exercise                      G. Manual Skills 10.3c-
    4. Internal factors such as dehydration                                   Tympanic Temperature
C. Heat loss. Heat is normally lost from the body through:                H. Manual Skills 10.3d-
    1. Skin – sweating or perspiration and increased blood flow to            Rectal Temperature
                                                                          I. Use visual aid for
         skin surface                                                         temperature reading in
    2. Lungs – increased respiratory rate                                     the ear
    3. Elimination – urine and feces                                      J. Manual Skills 10.3e-
D. Heat conservation. Heat is conserved by the body through                   Electronic temperature
    1. Reducing perspiration
    2. Decreasing the flow of blood to the skin
    3. Shivering (which increases muscular activity to produce heat)
E. Four main sites for temperature measurement (Note
    contraindications on Skills Procedures pages)
    1. Oral (most common)
    2. Rectal

         a. Most accurate
         b. Not used as often as in past

              Caution: The vagus nerve may be stimulated when
              taking a rectal temperature, which may temporarily
              decrease the patient’s/resident’s heart rate and blood
              pressure
    3. Tympanic
    4. Axillary
    5. Temporal

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 5 of 46
F. Types of Thermometers                                                  Module 10: Vital Signs
    1. Glass                                                                       Page 6 of 46
         a. Clinical thermometer
         b. Mercury free; mercury glass thermometers are no longer
              used by many facilities, as the mercury is toxic
         c. Oral or Axillary thermometer has long narrow bulb and blue
              or green color coding
         d. Rectal thermometer has short stubby bulb and is color
              coded red
         e. All glass thermometers require the use of a disposable
              plastic sheath
    2. Digital
         a. Used for oral, rectal or axillary measurement
         b. Battery operated
         c. Takes approximately 60 seconds to display the
              temperature
         d. Will flash or beep when the temperature has been
              registered
         e. Requires the use of a disposable plastic sheath
    3. Electronic
         a. Used for oral, rectal or axillary measurement
         b. Registers temperature in 2-60 seconds
         c. Flashes or makes a sound when temperature is displayed
         d. Probes are color coded (red-rectal, blue/green-oral or
              axillary)
         e. Requires the use of a disposable plastic probe cover
         f. Stored in a re-charging unit when not in use
    4. Disposable
         a. Used for oral or axillary measurement
         b. Single use, usually used for patients/residents in isolation
         c. Does not require the use of a disposable cover

Model Curriculum for Nurse Assistants - Revised September 2013
    5. Tympanic                                                                              Module 10: Vital Signs
         a. Used to measure temperature reading in the ear
         b. Requires a disposable probe cover                                     A. Written test
         c. Incorrect positioning or ear wax may cause inaccurate                 B. Observation in clinical
              reading
         d. Hearing Aids need to be removed                                           setting
         e. Stored in a re-charging base when not in use

    6. Temporal Artery
         a. Infrared thermometer that measures the temperature of
              temporal artery
         b. Device for forehead measurement

G. Normal ranges for temperature

    1. Normal resting range in adult (97F – 99F) or
          (36C – 37.5C)

    2. Oral 98.6F

    3. Rectal 99.6 F – one degree higher than oral

    4. Axillary 97.6 F – one degree lower than oral
    5. Tympanic or temporal 98.6° F

Objective 4                                                        A. Lecture
Describe nursing measures to raise and lower temperature of the    B. Discussion
body.
A. Measures to raise the temperature

    1. Increase the temperature in the room
    2. Add coverings to the body
    3. Provide hot liquids to drink
    4. Give warm baths or soaks
B. Measures to lower the temperature
    1. Decrease the temperature in the room
    2. Remove coverings from the body
    3. Offer cool liquids to drink
    4. Provide cool bath or sponging

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 7 of 46
                                                                                                            Module 10: Vital Signs

Objective 5                                                              A. Lecture/Discussion        A. Written test
Describe the circulatory system as it relates to pulse and identify      B. Use visual aid for        B. Locates major pulse
the pulse sites.
A. Pulse                                                                     demonstrating pulse          sites
                                                                             sites
    1. Each time the heart contracts, blood is forced into the arterial  C. Role play
         system. The arterial walls expand to accept the increase in     D. Advanced activity: Ask
         pressure; this expansion is called the pulse                        students to research
                                                                             procedure for pulse
    2. By counting each palpated expansion of the arterial wall, the         deficit measurement and
         pulse rate can be determined                                        report/demonstrate to
                                                                             the class
    3. The average (adult heart beat) pulse is 60 to100 beats/minute
B. Major pulse sites

    1. Carotid – neck
    2. Apical – left chest (taken with stethoscope)
    3. Brachial – inner part of elbow
    4. Radial – thumb side of wrist
    5. Femoral – groin
    6. Popliteal – behind the knee
    7. Dorsalis pedis – (pedal) top of the foot

Objective 6                                                              A. Lecture/Discussion        A. Written test
Describe the factors that increase and decrease pulse, and the           B. Demonstration and         B. Demonstrates accurate
qualities to observe in taking a pulse.
A. Factors that increase pulse                                               return demonstration of      measurement for radial
                                                                             radial and apical pulse      and brachial pulse for
    1. Exercise                                                              measurement for full         one full minute
    2. Fever                                                                 minute                   C. Reports abnormal pulse
    3. Hemorrhage                                                        C. Role play                     to nurse
    4. Pain                                                              D. Manual Skills 10.6a-
    5. Shock                                                                 Radial Pulse
    6. Strong emotions (anger, fear, laughter, excitement)               E. Manual Skills 10.6b-
    7. Over 100 beats/min – tachycardia                                      Apical Pulse

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 8 of 46
B. Factors that decrease the pulse                                  A. Lecture                Module 10: Vital Signs
                                                                    B. Discussion  A. Written test
    1. Sleep/rest

    2. Depression

    3. Drugs (digitalis, morphine)

    4. Athletes in good physical condition have a lower pulse,
         probably below 60 beats/min

    5. Below 60 beats/min – bradycardia

C. Qualities of pulse

    1. Rate – number of beats per minute

    2. Rhythm

         a. Refers to regularity of pulse beats

         b. Report irregular heart rhythm even if rate is normal

    3. Strength; force (volume) — weak (thready) or bounding
Objective 7
Define and describe respiration and factors affecting respiratory

rate.

A. Definition
    1. Respiration is defined as the exchange of oxygen and carbon
         dioxide in lungs
    2. Breathing refers to inhalation and exhalation of air
    3. Regulated in the brain by the medulla

B. Normal rate in adult is 12 to 20/minute
C. Normal breathing is quiet, effortless, and regular in rhythm
D. Factor that increase respiratory rate

    1. Exercise
    2. Strong emotion
    3. Infection
    4. Increased body temperature
    5. Increased metabolism
    6. Pain
E. Factors that decrease respiratory rate

         1. Rest/sleep
         2. Depression

         3. Drugs/medications

         4. Meditation

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 9 of 46
Objective 8                                                          A. Lecture/Discussion                    Module 10: Vital Signs
Describe observations to be made when measuring respirations.        B. Manual Skills 10.8-
A. Rate                                                                                            A. Written test
                                                                         Respirations              B. Demonstrates accurate
    1. Number of respirations per minute                             C. Demonstration and
    2. Normal adult 12-20/minute                                                                       measurement of
B. Rhythm; regularity of respirations                                    return demonstration for      respirations
C. Depth; shallow, normal, deep                                          measuring respiratory     C. Reports immediately to
D. Symmetry                                                              rate                          nurse if
E. Effort it involves                                                D. Role play                      patient’s/resident’s
F. Discomfort it causes                                                                                respiratory rate is above
G. Position patient/resident adopts                                  A. Lecture                        or below normal
H. Sounds that accompany it                                          B. Discussion
I. Color of skin and mucous membranes, nail beds (cyanosis)                                        A. Written test
J. Changes in patient’s/resident’s behavior                                                        B. Reports abnormal

Objective 9                                                                                            breathing pattern or
Describe abnormal breathing patterns.                                                                  change in
A. Labored; the patient/resident struggles or works hard to breathe                                    patient’s/resident’s
B. Orthopnea; breathing possible only when person sits or stands                                       appearance or behavior
C. Stertorous; patient/resident makes snoring sounds while                                             to licensed nurse

    breathing (indicates partial airway obstruction)
D. Abdominal; breathing using mostly the abdominal muscles
E. Shallow; breathing with only the upper part of the lungs
F. Dyspnea; painful or difficult breathing
G. Tachypnea; respiratory rate above 24/minute
H. Bradypnea; respiratory rate less than 10/minute
I. Apnea; absence of breathing
J. Cheyne-stokes respirations gradually increase in rate and depth

    and then become shallow and slow, then a period of apnea

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 10 of 46
                                                                                                            Module 10: Vital Signs

Objective 10                                                             A. Lecture/Discussion         A. Demonstrates accurate
Describe the process for taking temperature, pulse and                   B. Demonstration/return           measurement of TPR in
                                                                                                           one process
respiration (TPR) as a combined procedure.                                   demonstration of TPR
                                                                             measurement               B. Reports abnormal to
A. The temperature is taken first, then the pulse, followed by           C. Role play                      licensed nurse
    respirations

B. Be sure to remember the pulse rate while counting the respirations
    so they can be documented together

C. Try not to stop to record the pulse before counting the respirations

Objective 11                                                             A. Lecture/Discussion         A. Written test
Describe what happens in the circulatory system to produce               B. Ask students to research
blood pressure.
A. Circulatory system and blood pressure                                     pulse pressure reading
                                                                             and disorders where this
    1. Blood Pressure is the force (pressure) of the blood pushing           would be indicated
         against the walls of arteries

    2. Systolic pressure (first number of reading)
         a. Heart contracts forcing blood into the artery
         b. Pressure at highest in arteries

    3. Diastolic pressure (second number of reading)
         a. Heart at rest
         b. Pressure at lowest in arteries; arteries completely open

    4. Thumping sounds
         a. Produced as blood flows through the arteries
         b. Heard in large arteries of limbs

    5. Sounds correspond to numbers
         a. Represents millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), seen on
              sphygmomanometer
         b. First sound heard when taking blood pressure is systolic
              pressure
              1) Contraction of heart muscle
              2) Closure of the mitral and tricuspid valves
         c. Last sound heard when taking the blood pressure is
              diastolic pressure

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 11 of 46
              1) Relaxation of heart muscle                                                       Module 10: Vital Signs
              2) Closure of aortic and pulmonic valves                                 A. Written test
         d. Recorded as an improper fraction—systolic over diastolic
B. Blood pressure – normal and abnormal ranges
    1. Normal adult
         a. 120/80 mm Hg.
         b. 90 - 140 range for systolic
         c. Systolic reading of 139 is classified as pre-hypertensive
         d. 60-90 range for diastolic
         e. Diastolic reading of 89 is classified as pre-hypertensive
    2. Abnormal blood pressures
         a. Hypertension; persistent measurements above normal
              range
              1) 140 and above – systolic
              2) 90 and above – diastolic
         b. Hypotension; persistent measurements below normal
              range
              1) 90 and below – systolic
              2) 60 and below – diastolic
    3. Pulse pressure
         a. The difference between systolic and diastolic pressures
         b. May provide information concerning health of blood vessels
              (arteries)
         c. Average range is 30-50 mmHg.

Objective 12                                                            A. Lecture
Identify factors that increase or decrease blood pressure.              B. Discussion
A. Factors that raise blood pressure

    1. Strong emotion
    2. Exercise
    3. Standing or sitting
    4. Excitement
    5. Pain

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 12 of 46
    6. Decrease of blood vessel size                                   A. Lecture/Discussion                Module 10: Vital Signs
    7. Digestion                                                       B. Show equipment
    8. Improperly placed cuff                                                                    A. Written test
B. Factors that lower blood pressure                                   A. Lecture/Discussion
    1. Rest/sleep                                                      B. Manual Skills 10.14a-  A. Written test
    2. Lying down                                                                                B. Demonstrates accurate
    3. Depression                                                          Blood Pressure-One
    4. Shock                                                               step                      measurement of blood
    5. Hemorrhage                                                      C. Manual Skills 10.14b-      pressure
                                                                           Blood Pressure-Two    C. Reports abnormal blood
Objective 13                                                                                         pressure to licensed
Identify parts of the blood pressure equipment.                                                      nurse
A. Manual sphygmomanometer

         a. Cuff
         b. Bulb
         c. Manometer (aneroid or mercury column)
    2. Stethoscope
B. Electronic (automated) sphygmomanometer
    1. Cuff is attached to patient
    2. Cuff automatically inflates and deflates
    3. Blood pressure displayed digitally
    4. Stethoscope not required
C. Some facilities may use a monitoring device that measures other
    vital signs such as pulse rate, temperature and blood oxygen
    levels as well as blood pressure

Objective 14
Discuss the procedure for taking a blood pressure reading.
A. Guidelines

    1. Blood pressure commonly is measured at the brachial artery
    2. The popliteal artery (behind the knee) may also be used
    3. Blood pressure measurements at a site other than the brachial

         artery must be ordered by a doctor
    4. Patient/resident should be at rest; check position order (LSS-

         lying,

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 13 of 46
    sitting, standing)                                                      step                                Module 10: Vital Signs
                                                                                                     A. Written test
5. Make sure manometer is properly calibrated (reads “0” when           D. Display equipment and
    no air is in cuff)                                                      have students identify
                                                                            parts
6. Use appropriate sized cuff for the limb being used to measure
    blood pressure                                                      E. Demonstration and
    a. Cuff that is too narrow or small gives a false high                  return demonstration of
         reading                                                            blood pressure
    b. Cuff below the level of the heart will give a false high             measurement
         reading
    c. Improperly placed cuff or too loose cuff gives a false low       F. Role play
         reading
    d. Alternative sizes of blood pressure cuffs such as wide,
         large, and/or thigh cuffs

7. Do not take the blood pressure on an arm or side with injury or
    medical equipment present such as
    a. IV line

    b. Burns or injuries

    c. Paralysis due to stroke

    d. Amputation

    e. Cast

    f. Recent trauma

    g. Site used for dialysis

    h. Mastectomy or surgery on the breast

8. Position the patient’s/resident’s arm level with the heart

9. Apply blood pressure cuff to bare arm (not over clothing)

10. Position the sphygmomanometer at the Nursing Assistant’s
    eye level

11. Measurement techniques

    a. One step; no estimation of systolic pressure
         before measurement

    b. Two step; estimation of systolic pressure before
         measurement

Objective 15                                                            A. Lecture/Discussion
Discuss observation and reporting of patient’s/resident’s pain.

A. Pain was known as the 5th vital sign, but has measurable effects on
vital signs

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 14 of 46
                                                                                                            Module 10: Vital Signs

    1. Pain is not a normal part of aging                               B. Handout 10.15- Pain         B. Observation in clinical
                                                                            Scale
    2. Pain is a warning or distress signal by the body that something
         is wrong                                                       C. Role play use of pain
                                                                            scale
    3. Nursing Assistants may be the first to notice that
         patient/resident is in pain                                    D. Ask students to share
                                                                            possible barriers related
    4. Nursing Assistant must use skills of observation, as some            to pain management
         patients/residents may not verbally indicate they have
         pain

    5. Each person’s response to pain may be different

    6. Culture may play an important part on a patient’s/resident’s
         reaction to having pain

    7. Pain may cause or increase anxiety and or stress

    8. Take complaints of pain seriously, avoid judging

    9. Types of pain:
             a. Acute pain

             b. Chronic pain

             c. Phantom pain
B. Signs of Pain

    1. Increased pulse, respirations, blood pressure
    2. Sighing, moaning, groaning, or crying
    3. Nausea, vomiting
    4. Sweating
    5. Squeezing eyes shut, tightening jaw, grinding teeth, holding a

         body part tightly
    6. Increased restlessness, agitation or tension
    7. Difficulty moving, positioning or walking
C. Guidelines for observation and reporting of pain
    1. Ask patient/resident if they are in any pain.
    2. Use pain scale
    3. Ask patient/resident to describe the pain

              • Location
              • Frequency (continuous, off and on)
              • Duration (how long pain lasts)
              • Pain quality (nature and type of pain)
    4. Observe facial expression, movement, respiration
    5. Ask patient/resident level of pain using facility method

    6. Report complaints of pain to licensed nurse

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 15 of 46
                                                                                                            Module 10: Vital Signs

D. Nurse Assistant comfort measures
   1. Check on patient/resident often and ask if the pain has been
        relieved
   2. Tell patient what you plan to do and how you will do it
   3. Avoid sudden, jerking movement when repositioning
   4. Offer backrubs (if indicated)
   5. Listen to patient/resident concerns, provide emotional support
   6. Maintain a clean, comfortable, quiet environment
   7. Eliminate unpleasant sounds, sights, odors from the
        environment

Objective 16                                                              A. Lecture/Discussion           A. Written test
Record vital signs on chart, graph and Nursing Assistant notes.           B. Provide facility flow chart  B. Accurately records vital

A. Charting temperature, pulse, respiration (TPR)                             and/or graphic sheets for       signs on facility flow
    1. Report normal and abnormal TPR to licensed nurse                       students to practice            charts and graphic
    2. Record on hospital flow sheets, graphic records, and Nursing           recording                       sheets according to
         Assistant notes according to facility policies. Record in the    C. Role play and record             facility policy
         order of TPR                                                         vital signs
    3. Record temperature

         a. Chart rectal temperature with an” R” (example 101F (R))

         b. Chart an axillary temperature with an “AX” (example 101F
              (Ax))

    4. Pulse readings other than radial must be noted (example;
         Apical pulse 86 (a)

    5. Record respiratory rate
B. Charting blood pressure

    1. Record and report abnormal high or low reading to licensed
         nurse

    2. Write on chart as a fraction: systolic/diastolic (example 120/80)

    3. If taken in a place other than arm, note location (example
         150/90-thigh)

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 16 of 46
                                                                                                            Module 10: Vital Signs

Sample Test: Module 10- Vital Signs

1. The amount of force exerted against the walls of the artery by the blood is commonly referred to as:
         A. Blood pressure
         B. Pulse
         C. Metabolism
         D. Hypertension

2. The normal oral temperature of an adult
         patient/resident is: A. 96.2 F
         B. 98.6F
         C. 101.0F
         D. 99.6F

3. The Nurse Assistant enters Mr. S’s room to take his oral temperature and observes that he is drinking a glass of ice water. The
    Nurse Assistant should:
         A. Proceed with the oral temperature as planned
         B. Take a rectal temperature instead because the ice water will affect an oral reading
         C. Place a plastic sheath over the oral thermometer so the reading won’t be affected
         D. Request that the patient not eat or drink anything else for 15 minutes and then return to take his temperature

4. Which of the steps mentioned below should the Nurse Assistant not do as part of taking a rectal temperature for an adult?
         A. Shake down the thermometer until it registers below 96F.
         B. Position the patient in the prone position
         C. Lubricate the bulb end of the thermometer
         D. Insert the thermometer one inch into the rectum

5. Which of the following can increase the pulse rate?
         A. Depression
         B. Cold
         C. Pain
         D. Sleep

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 17 of 46
                                                                                                            Module 10: Vital Signs

6. Before using a stethoscope from the nursing unit, the Nurse Assistant should:
         A. Wash the diaphragm with soap and water
         B. Clean the earpieces and the diaphragm with an alcohol wipe
         C. Disinfect the entire stethoscope with a strong disinfectant
         D. Replace the earpieces as they are disposable

7. A patient/resident’s diastolic pressure is 104 mm Hg. A high diastolic reading could be serious because it:
         A. Means the patient/resident has hypotension
         B. Means the patient/resident is in shock
         C. Measures the amount of pressure in the arteries when the heart is contracting
         D. Measures the amount of pressure in the arteries when the heart is at rest

8. Mr. Johnson is a 75 year old, who has a cardiac condition and is experiencing bradycardia. Which pulse rate represents
    bradycardia?
         A. 152 beats per minute
         B. 84 beats per minute
         C. 68 beats per minute
         D. 42 beats per minute

9. The Nurse Assistant is taking routine vital signs on a patient/resident who is known to have an irregular pulse. The Nurse
    Assistant should take a:
         A. Radial pulse for 15 seconds and multiply by 4
         B. Radial pulse for 30 seconds and multiply by 2
         C. Radial pulse for one full minute
         D. Carotid pulse for 30 seconds and multiply by 2

10. The radial pulse is the most common site used for routine vital signs. The radial pulse is located on the:
         A. Internal side of the arm just below the elbow
         B. External side of the arm just below the elbow
         C. Thumb side of the wrist
         D. Little finger (pinkie) side of the wrist

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 18 of 46
                                                                                                                                                      Module 10: Vital Signs

11. When taking a patient’s/resident’s temperature, pulse, respirations (TPR), the respiration should be counted after the:
         A. Temperature has been taken
         B. Pulse has been taken, while the fingers remain on the pulse site
         C. Pulse has been taken and written down
         D. Nurse Assistant informs the patient/resident that the respirations will be counted

12. A respiration is defined as:
         A. One deep inhalation
         B. One full inhalation and exhalation cycle
         C. One deep exhalation
         D. A breath counted with each heartbeat

13. A patient/resident has a temperature of 102F. What can the Nurse Assistant do to assist in lowering the fever without a
    physician’s order?
         A. Give the patient/resident an alcohol bath
         B. Apply an ice cap to the patient’s/resident’s forehead
         C. Place the patient on a hypothermia blanket
         D. Encourage the patient/resident to drink cool fluids, if allowed to have oral intake

14. Which of the following pulse rates and blood pressure readings are within normal range for adult
         A. Pulse 100, BP 200/100
         B. Pulse 110, BP 140/90
         C. Pulse 72, BP 130/84
         D. Pulse 40, BP 90/60

15. Which of the following signs is not associated with a fever?
         A. Flushed face
         B. Thirst
         C. Skin dry and hot to touch
         D. Decreased pulse

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 19 of 46
                                                                                                            Module 10: Vital Signs

16. When a patient/resident experiences difficult, painful or labored breathing, it is known as:
         A. Tachypnea
         B. Apnea
         C. Dyspnea
         D. Bradypnea

17. Which one of the following statements about blood pressure is true:
         A. The cuff can be placed over clothing
         B. Blood pressure can be measured on an injured arm or one that has an IV inserted
         C. The cuff is inflated 20mm – 30mm above the point where the radial pulse was palpated in the two step procedure
         D. Blood pressure cuffs should be the same size for all patients/residents

18. Which of the following pulses is located at the inner side of the elbow?
         A. Carotid
         B. Apical
         C. Popliteal
         D. Brachial

19. When taking a blood pressure reading, the higher number represents the pressure in the artery at the peak of cardiac contraction.
    This is called the:
         A. Apical pressure
         B. Diastolic pressure
         C. Systolic pressure
         D. Pulse pressure

20. When a patient/resident must be in a sitting position in order to breathe, this is known as:
         A. Cheyne-stokes respiratory
         B. Orthopnea
         C. Hyperventilation
         D. Snoring

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 20 of 46
                                                                                                                  Module 10: Vital Signs

21. When taking a patient’s/resident’s blood pressure, the Nurse Assistant will need to use a stethoscope and a:
         A. Wrist watch
         B. Specimen container
         C. Thermometer
         D. Sphygmomanometer

22. The Nurse Assistant is preparing to take a patient’s/resident’s blood pressure. The patient/resident has an IV in the right
    arm. The Nurse Assistant should:
         A. Take the blood pressure above the IV site in the right arm
         B. Take the blood pressure on the left arm
         C. Use a small cuff to take the blood pressure on the right arm
         D. Report the situation to the licensed nurse

23. The Nurse Assistant should know that the first sounds heard when taking a blood pressure reading is called the:
         A. Pulse pressure
         B. Diastolic pressure
         C. Auscultatory gap
         D. Systolic pressure

24. When taking a patient’s/resident’s vital signs, which of the following should the Nurse Assistant recognize as abnormal?
         A. Pulse 124
         B. Respirations 18
         C. Oral temperature, 99° F (37.2° C)
         D. Blood pressure 138/60 mmHg.

25. Which of the following is the correct order for the Nurse Assistant to use when recording a patient’s/resident’s vital signs?
         A. Pulse, temperature, and respirations
         B. Blood pressure, respirations, and temperature
         C. Temperature, pulse, and respirations
         D. Respirations, pulse, and blood pressur

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018           Page 21 of 46
                                                                                                                                                      Module 10: Vital Signs

26. When the patient/resident returns to his room after a short walk, he reports shortness of breath and tightness in the chest.
    Which of the following should the Nurse Assistant do FIRST?
         A. Tell the patient/resident that he will be fine soon
         B. Take their vital signs
         C. Stay with the patient/resident and call for the nurse immediately
         D. Call the family

27. When a Nurse Assistant is unable to obtain a patient’s/resident’s pulse rate:
         A. Ask another nurse assistant to check the pulse
         B. Take the pulse again for 15 seconds and multiply the rate by 4
         C. Ask the patient/resident if her pulse is sometimes hard to find
         D. Take the pulse for a full minute at another location

28. The Nurse Assistant is taking a patient’s/resident’s temperature. Which of the following would be a normal axillary temperature
         reading? A. 97.6° F (36.4° C)
         B. 98.6° F (37° C)
         C. 99.6° F (37.6° C)
         D. 100.6° F (38.1° C)

29. The Nurse Assistant is taking a patient’s/resident’s blood pressure. To read systolic pressure a second time, the Nurse Assistant
    should:
         A. Immediately pump the cuff back up to 200 mmHg and try again
         B. Deflate the cuff completely, wait 1-2 minutes and retake the blood pressure
         C. Continue to deflate the cuff and add 20 points to the first sound heard
         D. Wait at least 30 minutes before reading the blood pressure again

30. To take a patient’s/resident’s pulse, the Nurse Assistant should:
         A. Put on gloves
         B. Use the thumb to feel the pulse
         C. Count the pulse for 10 seconds
         D. Take the pulse on the thumb side of the wrist

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 22 of 46
                                                                                                            Module 10: Vital Signs

Sample Test Answers: Module 10  16. C
                                17. C
1. A                            18. D
2. B                            19. C
3. D                            20. B
4. B                            21. D
5. C                            22. B
6. B                            23. D
7. D                            24. A
8. D                            25. C
9. C                            26. B
10. C                           27. D
11. B                           28. A
12. B                           29. B
13. D                           30. D
14. C
15. D

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 23 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs                                                                     Manual Skills 10.3a: Oral Temperature

                        Manual Skill: Oral Temperature

EQUIPMENT:

Disposable sheath (cover)
Gloves (check facility policy)
Pen and paper
Thermometer Glass—Oral with blue or green color coding; check for cracks, breaks or chips
Tissue
Watch

TEMPERATURE: Oral (98.6 degrees F or 37.0 degrees C)

BEGINNING STEPS:

1. Wash hands.
2. Knock and pause before entering the patient’s/resident’s room.
3. Introduce self.
4. Identify patient/resident.
5. Explain procedure speaking clearly, slowly, and directly. Maintain face-to-face contact whenever possible.
6. Gather equipment, if applicable.
7. Provide for privacy with a curtain, door, or screen.
8. Apply gloves (standard precautions).

SKILL STEPS:

1. Rinse thermometer in cool water and dry with tissue. Shake mercury down below 96 degrees F, holding the thermometer at end
    opposite bulb. Check again for chips, cracks or breaks.

2. Apply thermometer cover.
3. Ask the patient/resident if he/she has recently had hot or cold liquids or smoked. If so, wait 15 minutes to take temperature.
4. Place bulb of the thermometer in patient’s/resident’s mouth under base of tongue. Instruct the patient/resident to close

    lips around the thermometer; stay with patient/resident.
5. Note time of insertion and remove in 2-3 minutes or time interval according to facility policy.

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018     Page 24 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs                                                              Manual Skills 10.3a: Oral Temperature

6. Remove thermometer cover with gloved hand and wipe thermometer from stem to bulb with tissue. Do not touch bulb end of
    thermometer.

7. Read thermometer to the nearest two tenths of a degree.
8. Record temperature on paper if ordered, and proceed with vital signs.
9. Wash the thermometer with cool water and soap, and shake down before storing in the proper container (according to facility

    procedure). Note – never use hot water.
10. Discard sheath according to facility policy.

ENDING STEPS:

1. Clean and return equipment and supplies, if applicable.
2. Remove gloves (without contaminating self) into waste container and wash hands
3. Position patient/resident comfortably.
4. Place call light within reach.
5. Lower bed to safe position for the patient/resident.
6. Leave room neat.
7. Wash hands.
8. Document.
9. Report abnormal findings to licensed nurse.

NOTE: Contraindications for oral temperatures include the patient/resident who is:

1. Confused.
2. Disoriented.
3. Restless.
4. Unconscious.
5. Coughing.
6. Unable to breathe through his/her nose.
7. Prone to seizures.
8. Receiving oral/nasal oxygen.
9. Has difficulty breathing.
10. Receiving nasogastric tube feeding.

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 25 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs                                                                     Manual Skills 10.3b: Axillary Temperature

                        Manual Skill: Axillary Temperature

EQUIPMENT:

Disposable sheath (cover)
Gloves (check facility policy)
Pen and paper
Thermometer Glass—Oral with blue or green color coding; check for cracks, breaks or chips
Tissue
Watch

TEMPERATURE: Axillary (97.6 degrees F or 36.4 degrees C)

BEGINNING STEPS:

1. Wash hands.
2. Knock and pause before entering the patient’s/resident’s room.
3. Introduce self.
4. Identify patient/resident.
5. Explain procedure speaking clearly, slowly and directly. Maintain face-to-face contact whenever possible.
6. Gather equipment, if applicable.
7. Provide for privacy using a curtain, screen, or door.
8. Apply gloves, if necessary.

SKILL STEPS:

1. Rinse thermometer in cool water, dry with tissue.
2. Shake thermometer down below 96 degrees F, holding thermometer at end opposite bulb.
3. Apply thermometer cover.
4. Remove the patient’s/resident’s arm from the sleeve of the gown. Protect patient’s/resident’s privacy. If the axillary region is moist

    with perspiration, pat dry with a towel.
5. Place the bulb of the thermometer in the center of the armpit (axilla).
6. Put the patient’s/resident’s arm across the chest or abdomen.
7. If the patient/resident is unconscious or too weak to help, hold the thermometer in place.

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018    Page 26 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs  Manual Skills 10.3b: Axillary Temperature

8. Hold the thermometer in place for 5-10 minutes. Stay with the patient/resident.
9. Remove the thermometer. Remove the disposable cover (with gloved hand if necessary) discard cover as per facility policy. Wipe

    thermometer off from stem to bulb.
10. Read the thermometer and record the temperature to the nearest two-tenths degree. Note that this is an axillary temperature by

    writing an “AX” after the figure.
11. Put the patient’s/resident’s arm back in the sleeve of the gown.
12. Wash the thermometer in cool water and soap and store according to facility policy.

ENDING STEPS:

1. Clean and return equipment and supplies, if applicable.
2. Remove gloves (if wearing) without contaminating self into water container and washes hands.
3. Position patient/resident comfortably.
4. Place call light within reach.
5. Lower bed to safe position for the patient/resident.
6. Leave room neat.
7. Wash hands.
8. Document.
9. Report abnormal findings to licensed nurse.

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 27 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs                                                          Manual Skills 10.3c: Tympanic Temperature
                        Manual Skill: Tympanic Temperature

EQUIPMENT:

Pen and paper
Thermometer (electronic tympanic thermometer) with probe covers

TEMPERATURE: Tympanic (Aural) (98.6 degrees F or 37.0 degrees C)

BEGINNING STEPS:

1. Wash hands.
2. Knock and pause before entering the patient’s/resident’s room.
3. Introduce self.
4. Identify patient/resident.
5. Explain procedure speaking clearly, slowly, and directly. Maintain face-to-face contact whenever possible
6. Gather equipment, if applicable.
7. Provide for privacy with a curtain, door, or screen.
8. Apply gloves (standard precautions).

SKILL STEPS:

1. Apply disposable probe cover to thermometer.
2. Ask the patient/resident to turn their head so that the ear is in front of you.
3. Gently pull back on ear to straighten the ear canal.
4. Insert covered probe, making sure the canal opening is sealed off, rotating the probe handle until it is aligned with the jaw.
5. Activate thermometer by pressing appropriate button.
6. The temperature is measured within 2-3 seconds and is displayed in digital format.
7. Eject the used probe cover into the trash without touching it.
8. Record temperature on paper.

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018    Page 28 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs                                                              Manual Skills 10.3c: Tympanic Temperature

ENDING STEPS:

1. Clean and return equipment and supplies, if applicable.
2. Remove gloves (without contaminating self) into waste container and wash hands.
3. Position patient/resident comfortably.
4. Place call light within reach.
5. Lower bed to safe position for the patient/resident.
6. Leave room neat.
7. Wash hands.
8. Document.
9. Report abnormal findings to licensed nurse.

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 29 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs                                                                           Manual Skills 10.3d: Rectal Temperature

                        Manual Skill: Rectal Temperature

EQUIPMENT:

Gloves (check facility policy)
Paper towel
Pen and paper
Thermometer; glass; rectal (red color coded, check for cracks, breaks or chips)
Thermometer covers
Tissue
Watch
Water-soluble lubricant (unless probe covers are pre-lubricated)

TEMPERATURE: Rectal (99.6 degrees F or 37.5 degrees C)
BEGINNING STEPS

1. Wash hands.
2. Knock and pause before entering the patient’s/resident’s room.
3. Introduce self.
4. Identify patient/resident.
5. Explain procedure speaking clearly, slowly, and directly. Maintain face-to-face contact whenever possible.
6. Gather equipment, if applicable.
7. Provide for privacy with a curtain, door, or screen.
8. Apply gloves (standard precautions).

SKILL STEPS:

1. Take the thermometer from the container; check for breaks or chips.
2. Shake thermometer down to below 96F.
3. Apply thermometer cover.
4. Assist the patient/resident to lie on one side with their back toward you. (Sim’s position).
5. Cover the patient/resident with the bed linens so that only the anal area shows.
6. Obtain a paper towel and tissues.

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018     Page 30 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs                                                                 Manual Skills 10.3d: Rectal Temperature

7. Place a small amount of lubricating jelly on the paper towel.
8. Lubricate the bulb end of the thermometer.
9. Apply gloves if not already wearing.
10. Lift the upper buttock so the anus is seen.

11. Insert the thermometer 1into the rectum. (NEVER FORCE, STOP IF UNABLE TO INSERT, notify charge nurse.)
12. Hold it in place for 2-3 minutes or as required by facility policy. Stay with the patient/resident.
13. Remove the thermometer.
14. Remove the plastic cover with a tissue.
15. Place the used tissue on the paper towel.
16. Place thermometer on the paper towel.
17. Wipe the rectal area clean of any excess lubricant with tissue.
18. Cover the patient/resident.
19. Discard soiled tissue in the toilet.
20. Read temperature to the nearest two-tenths degree and note it was measured rectally by writing an “R” after the number.
21. Shake down the thermometer.
22. Wash with cool water and soap from stem to bulb.
23. Place the thermometer into the proper container.
24. Remove gloves.
25. Wash hands.
26. Write down the temperature on a piece of paper.

ENDING STEPS:

1. Clean and return equipment and supplies, if applicable.
2. Remove gloves (without contaminating self) into waste container and wash hands.
3. Position patient/resident comfortably.
4. Place call light within reach.
5. Lower bed to safe position for the patient/resident.
6. Leave room neat.
7. Wash hands.
8. Document.
9. Report abnormal findings to licensed nurse.

Note: Contraindications for rectal temperatures include the patient/resident who has:

Diarrhea                Rectal bleeding  Surgical rectal closure

Fecal impaction         Hemorrhoids

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 31 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs                                                          Manual Skills 10.3e: Electronic Temperature
                        Manual Skill: Electronic Temperature

EQUIPMENT:

Battery-operated electronic thermometer; correct color coded probe (blue/green for oral or axillary, red for rectal)
Plastic disposable probe cover
Water-soluble lubricant (for rectal temperature)
Gloves (for rectal temperature)
Pen and paper

BEGINNING STEPS:

1. Wash hands.
2. Knock and pause before entering the patient/resident’s room.
3. Introduce self.
4. Identify patient/resident.
5. Explain procedure speaking clearly, slowly, and directly. Maintain face-to-face contact whenever possible.
6. Gather equipment, if applicable.
7. Provide for privacy with a curtain, door, or screen.
8. Apply gloves (standard precautions).

SKILL STEPS:

1. Remove the probe from its stored position and insert it into the probe cover; turn on electronic thermometer.
2. Insert the covered probe in the appropriate opening (mouth, axilla, or rectum). For rectal temperature, lubricate the probe cover

    and wear gloves.
3. Hold probe in place and wait for beep to signal the temperature is complete, and note reading.
4. Remove the probe, release and discard the probe cover without touching it.
5. Return the probe to its stored position.
6. Write the temperature on a piece of paper.

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018            Page 32 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs  Manual Skills 10.3e: Electronic Temperature
ENDING STEPS:

1. Clean and return equipment and supplies, if applicable.
2. Remove gloves (without contaminating self) into waste container and wash hands.
3. Position patient/resident comfortably.
4. Place call light within reach.
5. Lower bed to safe position for the patient/resident.
6. Leave room neat.
7. Wash hands.
8. Document.
9. Report abnormal findings to licensed nurse.

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 33 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs                              Manual Skills 10.6b : Apical/Radial Pulse

                        Manual Skill: Apical Pulse

EQUIPMENT:

Alcohol wipe
Gloves if necessary
Pen and paper
Stethoscope
Watch with second hand

BEGINNING STEPS:

1. Wash hands.
2. Knock and pause before entering the patient’s/resident’s room.
3. Introduce self.
4. Identify patient/resident.
5. Explain procedure speaking clearly, slowly, and directly. Maintain face-to-face contact whenever possible.
6. Gather equipment, if applicable.
7. Provide for privacy with a curtain, door, or screen.
8. Apply gloves (standard precautions).

SKILL STEPS:

1. Clean the earpieces and diaphragm with wipes.
2. Have patient/resident sit or lie down.
3. Expose the nipple area of the left chest. Do not expose a woman’s breast.
4. Warm the diaphragm in your palm.
5. Place the earpieces in your ears.
6. Locate the apical pulse. Place the diaphragm 2-3 inches to the left of the breastbone and below the left nipple.
7. Count the pulse for one full minute, note if it is regular or irregular.
8. Cover the patient/resident; remove earpieces.

ENDING STEPS:                                                                                                        Page 34 of 46
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018
Module 10: Vital Signs                                                               Manual Skills 10.6b : Apical/Radial Pulse

10. Clean and return equipment and supplies, if applicable.
11. Remove gloves (without contaminating self) into waste container and wash hands.
12. Position patient/resident comfortably.
13. Place call light within reach.
14. Lower bed to safe position for the patient/resident.
15. Leave room neat.
16. Wash hands.
17. Document.
18. Report abnormal findings to licensed nurse.

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 35 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs                                                                    Manual Skills 10.6b : Apical/Radial Pulse
                        Manual Skill: Count and Record Radial Pulse

EQUIPMENT:

Wrist watch or other clock with second hand

BEGINNING STEPS

1. Wash hands.
2. Knock and pause before entering the patient’s/resident’s room.
3. Introduce self.
4. Identify patient/resident.
5. Explain procedure speaking clearly, slowly, and directly. Maintain face-to-face contact whenever possible
6. Gather equipment, if applicable.
7. Provide for privacy with a curtain, door, or screen

SKILL STEPS:
1. Places fingertips on thumb side of client’s wrist to locate radial pulse.
2. Count beats for one full minute.
3. After obtaining pulse by palpating in radial artery position, records pulse rate within plus or minus 4 beats of evaluators reading.

ENDING SKILLS:

1. Position patient/resident comfortably.
2. Lower bed to safe position for the patient/resident.
3. Signaling device is within reach.
4. Leave room neat.
5. Wash hands.
6. Document.
7. Report abnormal findings to licensed nurse.

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018    Page 36 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs                                              Manual Skills10.8: Respiration

                        Manual Skill: Count and Record Respiration

EQUIPMENT:
Gloves if necessary
Pen and paper
Watch with second hand

BEGINNING STEPS:
1. Wash hands.
2. Knock and pause before entering the patient’s/resident’s room.
3. Introduce self.
4. Identify patient/resident.
5. Explain procedure speaking clearly, slowly, and directly. Maintain face-to-face contact whenever possible.
6. Gather equipment, if applicable.
7. Provide for privacy with a curtain, door, or screen.

SKILL STEPS:
1. Count respirations for one full minute.
2. Washes hands.
3. Record respirations rate within plus or minus 2 breaths of evaluators reading.

ENDING STEPS:

1. Position patient/resident comfortably.
2. Lower bed to safe position for the patient/resident.
3. Signaling device is within reach.
4. Leave room neat.
5. Wash hands.
6. Document.
7. Report abnormal findings to licensed nurse.

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018     Page 37 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs                                                                             Manual Skills 10.14a: Blood Pressure
                        Manual Skill: Measure and Record Blood Pressure

EQUIPMENT:

Alcohol wipe
Blood pressure cuff (sphygmomanometer)
Pen and paper
Stethoscope

BEGINNING STEPS:

1. Wash hands.
2. Knock and pause before entering the patient’s/resident’s room.
3. Introduce self.
4. Identify patient/resident.
5. Explain procedure speaking clearly, slowly, and directly. Maintain face-to-face contact whenever possible.
6. Gather equipment, if applicable.
7. Provide for privacy with a curtain, door, or screen.

SKILL STEPS:

1. Before using stethoscope, wipe bell/diaphragm and earpieces of stethoscope with alcohol.
2. Client’s arm is positioned with palm up and upper arm is exposed.
3. Feels for brachial artery on inner aspect of arm, at bend of elbow.
4. Places blood pressure cuff snugly on client’s upper arm, with sensor/arrow over brachial artery site.
5. Earpieces of stethoscope are in ears and bell/diaphragm is over brachial artery site.
6. Candidate inflates cuff between 160 mm Hg to 180 mm Hg. If beat heard immediately upon cuff deflation, completely deflate cuff.

    Re-inflate cuff to no more than 200mm Hg.
7. Deflates cuff slowly and notes the first sound (systolic reading), and last sound (diastolic reading) (If rounding needed,

    measurements are rounded UP to the nearest 2 mm of mercury.)
8. Removes cuff.
9. Before recording wash hands.
10. After obtaining reading using BP cuff and stethoscope, record both systolic and diastolic pressures each within plus or minus 8

    mm Hg of evaluators reading.

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018     Page 38 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs                                      Manual Skills 10.14a: Blood Pressure

ENDING STEPS:

1. Clean and return equipment and supplies, if applicable.
2. Position patient/resident comfortably.
3. Lower bed to safe position for the patient/resident.
4. Signaling device is within reach.
5. Leave room neat.
6. Wash hands.
7. Document.
8. Report abnormal findings to licensed nurse.

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 39 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs                                                                        Manual Skills 10.14b: Blood Pressure-Two Step
                                        Manual Skill: Blood Pressure – Two Step

EQUIPMENT:

Alcohol wipe
Blood pressure cuff (sphygmomanometer)
Pen and paper
Stethoscope

BEGINNING STEPS:

1. Wash hands.
2. Knock and pause before entering the patient’s/resident’s room.
3. Introduce self.
4. Identify patient/resident.
5. Explain procedure speaking clearly, slowly, and directly. Maintain face-to-face contact whenever possible
6. Gather equipment, if applicable.
7. Provide for privacy with a curtain, door, or screen.
8. Apply gloves (standard precautions).

SKILL STEPS:

1. Wipe the stethoscope earpieces and diaphragm with alcohol wipes.
2. Have the person sit or lie down.
3. Position the person’s arm so it is level with the heart. The palm should be up.
4. Stand no more than three feet away from the sphygmomanometer. A mercury model should be vertical, on a flat surface, and at

    eye level. Have the aneroid type directly in front of you.
5. Expose the upper arm.
6. Squeeze the cuff to expel any remaining air. Close the valve on the bulb.
7. Find the brachial artery at the inner aspect of the arm, at bend of elbow.
8. Place the arrow on the cuff over the brachial artery. Wrap the cuff around the upper arm at least one inch above the elbow. It

    should be even and snug.
9. Place the stethoscope earpieces in your ears.
10. Locate the radial artery, palpating the radial pulse. Inflate the cuff until you can no longer feel the pulse.

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018    Page 40 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs                                                              Manual Skills 10.14b: Blood Pressure-Two Step

11. Deflate the cuff completely.
12. Inflate the cuff 30 mm Hg beyond the point at which you last felt the pulse.
13. Position the diaphragm over the brachial artery. Do not use thumb on diaphragm.
14. Deflate the cuff at an even rate of 2 to 4 millimeters per second. Turn the valve counterclockwise to deflate the cuff.
15. Note the point on the scale where you hear the first sound. This is the systolic reading. It should be near the point where the

    radial pulse disappeared.
16. Continue to deflate the cuff. Note the point where the sound disappears for the diastolic reading. Measurements are rounded up

    to the nearest 2mm of mercury if rounding is needed.
17. Deflate the cuff completely. Remove it from the person’s arm. Remove the stethoscope.
18. Record the person’s name and blood pressure on your note pad.
19. Return the cuff to the case or wall holder.

ENDING STEPS:

1. Clean and return equipment and supplies, if applicable.
2. Remove gloves (without contaminating self) into waste container and wash hands.
3. Position patient/resident comfortably.
4. Place call light within reach.
5. Lower bed to safe position for the patient/resident.
6. Leave room neat.
7. Wash hands.
8. Document.
9. Report abnormal findings to licensed nurse.

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 41 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum  Page 42 of 46
- Revised December 2018
Module 10: Vital Signs

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum  Page 43 of 46
- Revised December 2018
Module 10: Vital Signs

        Temperature (T)            Pulse (P)                Respiration (R)          Blood Pressure (BP)
                                   Adult:60-100 per minute  Adult: 12-20 per minute  Normal:
Normal  Oral: 97.6-99.6F                                                           Systolic- 100-139
Range   Average: 98.6F (37C)     Raises pulse:            Raises respiration:      Diastolic- 60-89
                                   1. Anemia                1. Elevated body         High:
        Rectal: 98.6-100.6F      2. Excitement                                     140/90 or above
                                   3. Exercise                  temperature and/or
        Axillary: 96.6- 98.6F    4. Fever                     environmental        Raises Blood Pressure:
                                   5. Hemorrhage                temperature          1. Digestion
        Tympanic: 97.6-99.6F     6. Pain                  2. Exercise              2. Disease of blood
                                   7. Shock                 3. Infection
        Temporal: 99.4-101.4F    8. Strong emotions       4. Strong emotions           vessels
                                   Lowers pulse:            Lowers respiration:      3. Excitement
Factors Raises Temperature:        1. Depression            1. Depression            4. Exercise
                                   2. Lying down            2. Respiratory center    5. Pain
that affect 1. Dehydration         3. Rest/sleep                depression           6. Standing or sitting
                                                            3. Rest/sleep            7. Strong emotions
the vital 2. Exercise                                                                Lowers Blood Pressure:
                                                                                     1. Depression
signs   3. Exposure to external                                                      2. Hemorrhage
                                                                                     3. Lying down
        heat                                                                         4. Rest/sleep
                                                                                     5. Shock
        4. Infection

        5. Pain

        6. Smoking

        7. Strong emotions

        Lowers Temperature:

        1. Cold drink or food

        2. Depression

        3. Exposure to cold

        4. Rest/sleep

        5. Shock

        6. Starvation

        Time of day (diurnal

        changes)

         Temperature highest in

        the P.M. (4-6pm)

         Temperature lowest in

        the A.M. (2-6am)

         Reflects changes in

        cellular activity, muscle

        activity, and food

        metabolism.

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 44 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs

Charting   1. When written on chart      1. Rate; number of             1. Rate; number of                  If taken in a place other
reminders      as part of TPR                beats/minute                   respirations/minute                than the arm, note the
               Temperature is the first                                                                        location:
               number. 98.6- 82-16       2. Rhythm refers to time       2. Rhythm; time interval
                                             interval between beats         between respirations           Example:
           2. Note as                                                                                      150/90 thigh
              a. Oral 98.6               3. Strength (force); thready,  3. Depth; shallow, normal,
              b. Rectal 99.6(R)              bounding                       deep
              c. Axillary 97.6 (AX)
                                         Examples:                      4. Effort it involves
                                            a. Strong and regular:      5. Discomfort it causes
                                                 even beats with good   6. Position patient adopts
                                                 force                  7. Sounds that accompany
                                            b. Weak and regular:
                                                 even beats with poor       it.
                                                 force                  8. Cyanosis
                                            c. Irregular: both strong   Examples:
                                                 and weak beats occur
                                                 within a minute           a. Regular in both depth
                                            d. Thready: generally               and rate
                                                 means it is of weak
                                                 force and irregular       b. Rapid, shallow
                                                                           c. Very slow or very deep
                                                                           d. Irregular depth and

                                                                                rhythm (Cheyne-
                                                                                Stokes)
                                                                           e. Dyspnea; labored or
                                                                                difficult R, usually with
                                                                                pain
                                                                           f. Orthopnea; breathing
                                                                                possible only when
                                                                                person sits or stands
                                                                                up.

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 45 of 46
Module 10: Vital Signs

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 46 of 46
