                                                                                           Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse

Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse
Minimum Number of Theory Hours: 6
Suggested Theory Hours: 7
Recommended Clinical Hours: 0

Statement of Purpose:
The purpose of this unit is to introduce the Nurse Assistant to patient/resident abuse. The module will focus on the nurse assistant
role in preventing, recognizing, and reporting instances of patient/resident abuse.

Terminology:                      13. Ethical standard                                     26. Ombudsman
1. Abuse                          14. False imprisonment                                   27. Physical abuse
2. Advance Directive              15. Financial abuse                                      28. Policy and Procedure
3. Aiding and abetting            16. Grievances                                           29. Privacy
4. Assault                        17. HIPAA                                                30. Psychological abuse
5. Battery                        18. Informed consent                                     31. Resident council
6. Choice                         19. Involuntary seclusion                                32. Restraints
7. Chronic                        20. Laws                                                 33. Scope of practice
8. Coercion                       21. Legal standard                                       34. Sexual abuse
9. Confidential                   22. Libel                                                35. Slander
10. Defamation                    23. Mandated reporter                                    36. Social services
11. Defamation of character       24. Neglect                                              37. Theft
12. Do Not Resuscitate (DNR)/ No  25. Negligence                                           38. Verbal abuse

    Code

Patient, resident, and client are synonymous terms referring to the person receiving care

Performance Standards (Objectives):                                                                                  Page 1 of 14
California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018
                                                                                                                                  Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse

Upon completion of the six (6) hours of class plus homework assignments and one (1) hour of clinical experience, the learner will be
able to:
1. Define key terminology
2. Identify and discuss types of elder abuse
3. Discuss the issues related to elder abuse
4. Explain the Nurse Assistant role in preventing elder abuse
5. Describe the Nurse Assistant role in reporting elder abuse

References:
    1. Acello, B. & Hegner, B. (2016). Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage Learning.

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 2 of 14
                                                                                                                             Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse

2. Acello, B. (2016). Workbook to accompany: Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage
    Learning

3. Anetzberger, G. & Dayton, C. (2013) Elder Abuse Risk Factors Podcast Part 1 located at
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0m_4_yzsMcU&feature=youtu.be

4. California Code of Regulations, Division 5, Chapter S1, Title 22. Statement of Resident Rights. Section 72527
5. CA Attorney General's publications available at www.safestates.org/page/publications
6. California Health and Safety Code, Sections 1599.1, 1599.2, 1599.3 http://www.search-california-

    law.com/research/section/ca/HSC/4.25/index.html
7. Caregiver training videos on elder abuse available from www.training.mmlearnorg.
8. Carter, P. J. (2017). Lippincott Essentials for Nursing Assistants: a Humanistic Approach to Caregiving. (4th ed.) Philadelphia,

    PA. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
9. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 42, 483.1, 483.12, 483.13, 483.15 https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2017-title42-

    vol5/xml/CFR-2017-title42-vol5-part483.xml
10. Deck, M. L. (2004). Instant Teaching Tools for the New Millennium. St Louis, MO. Mosby
11. Hartman Publishing. (2018). Workbook for Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque, NM.

    Hartman Publishing, Inc.
12. Haroun, L. & Royce, S. (2004). Teaching Ideas and Activities for Health Care. Albany, NY. Delmar Publishers
13. HIPAA Regulations (2005) https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/index.html
14. Hedman, S. A., Fuzy, J., & Rymer, S. (2018). Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque,

    NM. Hartman Publishing, Inc.
15. Pearson Vue (2018) California Nurse Assistant Candidate Handbook for National Nurse Aide Assessment Program.

    Philadelphia, PA. Pearson Education, Inc.
16. Resident Abuse and Exploitation Prevention and Protection video productions with facilitator guide available from

    www.videoproproduction.com
17. Sorrentino, S. A., Remmert, L., & and Kelly, R. (2018) Workbook and Competency Evaluation Review for Moby's Textbook for

    Nursing Assistants (9th ed.) St. Louis, MO. Mosby Company.
18. Sorrentino, S.A. and Remmert, L. (2018) Mosby's Textbook for Nursing Assistants. (9th ed.). St Louis, MO. Elsevier.
19. Weaver, L. & Wilding, M. (2013) The Dimensions of Engaged Teaching: a Practical Guide for Educators. Bloomington, IN.

    Solution Tree Press.

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 3 of 14
                                                                                                          Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse

                                   Content Outline                           Recommended Teaching           Clinical Demonstration/
                                                                                    Strategies and           Method of Evaluation
Objective 1                                                                          Assignments
Define key terminology                                                                                    A. Have students select
A. Review the terms listed in the terminology section.                      A. Lecture/Discussion             five words from the list
B. Spell the listed terms accurately.                                       B. Games: word searches,          of key terminology and
C. Pronounce the terms correctly.                                                                             write a sentence for
D. Use the terms in their proper context.                                       crossword puzzles,            each defining the term.
                                                                                Family Feud, Jeopardy,
                                                                                bingo, spelling bee,      B. Administer vocabulary
                                                                                hangman, and                  pre-test and post-test.
                                                                                concentration.
                                                                            C. Encourage use of           C. Uses appropriate
                                                                                internet, medical             terminology when
                                                                                dictionary, and               charting and reporting to
                                                                                textbooks.                    licensed personnel.
                                                                            D. Create flashcards.
                                                                                                          A. Written test
Objective 2                                                                 A. Lecture/Discussion         B. Class participation
Identify and discuss types of elder abuse                                   B. Arrange for tour of a
A. Define Abuse
                                                                                long term care facility.
         1. An intentional act or failure to act by a caregiver or another  C. Arrange for a guest
              person in a relationship involving an expectation of trust
              that causes or creates a risk of harm to an older adult who       speaker from a long
              is someone age 60 or older                                        term care facility.

         2. A crime and is one or more of the following elements:
               1) Willful causing of injury
               2) Unreasonable confinement
               3) Intimidation, making someone afraid
               4) Punishment
               5) Refusal of goods or services needed for physical,
                    mental or psychological well-being

         3. Can happen to any older person, but often affects those
              who depend on others for help with activities of everyday
              life

         4. Likely targets are older people who have no family or

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 4 of 14
Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse

              friends nearby and people with disabilities, memory                                           Page 5 of 14
              problems, cognitive problems, or dementia
B. Forms or types of Elder Abuse (National Institute of Aging):
         1. Verbal
              1) Teasing
              2) Profanity
              3) Racial slanders
              4) Threats
         2. Physical
              1) Battery: kicking, biting, hitting, shoving, pulling hair
              2) Rough handling
         3. Psychological (Emotional abuse)
              1) Ridiculing or saying hurtful words
              2) Ignoring repeatedly
              3) Manipulating
              4) Yelling at or threatening
         4. Involuntary seclusion
              1) Isolation
              2) Keeping that person from seeing close friends and

                   relatives
         5. Abandonment

              1) Leaving someone unattended
              2) No planning for patient's/resident's care
         6. Neglect
              1) Failure to provide care that a reasonable person would

                   provide
              2) Not answering call light
              3) Smells of urine and not being cleaned/changed
         7. Sexual
              1) Overtures or Innuendos
              2) Inappropriate gestures
              3) Inappropriate touching
              4) Forcing an older adult to watch or be part of sexual

                   acts
         8. Financial

              1) Stealing money or borrowing items

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018
                                                                             Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse

              2) Accepting gifts
              3) May include forging checks, taking someone else's

                   retirement and Social Security benefits, using another
                   person's credit cards and bank accounts, changing
                   names on a will, bank account, life insurance policy, or
                   title to a house without permission from the older
                   person
         9. Healthcare Fraud
              1) Overcharging
              2) Billing twice for the same service
              3) Falsifying Medicaid or Medicare claims
              4) Charging for care that was not provided
              5) Committed by healthcare providers or hospital staff
C. Signs and Symptoms of abuse
         1. Has new onset sleeping problems
         2. Seems depressed or confused
         3. Loses weight for no reason
         4. Displays signs of trauma, like rocking back and forth
         5. Acts agitated or violent
         6. Becomes withdrawn
         7. Stops taking part in activities that the patient/resident
              previously liked
         8. Has unexplained bruises, burns, or scars
         9. Appears unkempt or messy with unwashed hair or dirty
              clothes
         10. Develops bed sores or other preventable conditions

Objective 3:                                                                 A. Lecture/Discussion      A. Written test
                                                                             B. Handout 2.5- Abuse      B. Class participation
Discuss the issues related to elder abuse
                                                                                 Reporting Form- SOC
 A. Abuse is a crime and is one or more of the following elements:               341
      1. Willful causing of injury.                                          C. Video "Your Legal
      2. Unreasonable confinement.                                               Duty: Reporting Elder
      3. Intimidation, making someone afraid.                                    and Dependent Adult
      4. Punishment.                                                             Abuse" Fax requests
      5. Refusal of goods or services needed for physical,
           mental or psychological well-being.

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 6 of 14
                                                                            Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse

 B. Elder abuse has been:                                                       to Bureau of Medi-Cal
      1. Poorly or imprecisely defined                                          Fraud and Elder
      2. Defined specifically to reflect the unique statutes or conditions      Abuse. FAX: 916-
           present in specific states, counties, or cities                      263-2565.
      3. Defined specifically for research purposes                             Downloadable
                                                                                publications from CA
 C. All states require the reporting of elder abuse or child abuse              Attorney General's
 D. Forms of elder abuse (refer to objective 2)                                 office available at
                                                                                www.safestate.org/publ
      1. Physical abuse                                                         i cations
      2. Verbal abuse                                                       D. Bureau of Medi-Cal
      3. Involuntary seclusion                                                  Fraud and Elder
      4. Financial abuse                                                        Abuse
      5. Psychological abuse (emotional/mental abuse)                           http://ag.ca.gov/bmfea/
      5. Sexual abuse                                                           el der.php
      6. Neglect
      7. Abandonment
      8. Healthcare Fraud
 D. Recognizing the evidence and observation of elder abuse
      1. Living conditions are unsafe, unclean or inadequate
      2. Personal hygiene is lacking.
      3. Weight loss
      4. Frequent injuries
      5. Old bruises
      6. Quiet and withdrawn attitude
      7. Anxious to please caregiver
      8. Private conversations not allowed
      9. Medications not taken properly
      10. Frequent Visits to ER, hospital, or clinics
      11. May go from one doctor to another
 E. Evaluate how a series of actions and reactions might lead to
    abuse
 F. Define local, state, and federal regulations regarding abuse
    (mandated reporter)
Objective 4:

Explain the Nurse Assistant role in recognizing and preventing
elder abuse

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 7 of 14
                                                                        Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse

A. Explain the difference between negligence and abuse                  A. Lecture/Discussion          A. Written test
B. Recognize the evidence of elder abuse                                B. Locate facility policies    B. Class participation
                                                                                                       C. Locate facility policies,
     1. Living conditions are unsafe, unclean or inadequate.                and procedures and
     2. Personal hygiene is lacking.                                        patient/resident rights        procedures, and
     3. Weight loss                                                         documents.                     patient/resident rights
     4. Frequent injuries                                               C. Role-play a situation that      documents.
    5. Old bruises                                                          involves a threat to       D. Consistently promotes
    6. Quiet and withdrawn attitude                                         patient/resident rights        patient/resident rights
    7. Anxious to please caregiver
    8. Private conversations not allowed
    9. Medications not taken properly
    10. Frequent Visits to ER, hospital, or clinics
    11. May go from one doctor to another
C. Explain Nurse Assistant role in preventing abuse
    1. Identify combination of individual, relational, community, and

         societal factors contribute to the risk of abuse
    2. Current diagnosis of mental illness
    3. Current abuse of alcohol
    4. High levels of hostility
    5. Poor or inadequate preparation or training for care giving

         responsibilities
    6. Assumption of caregiving responsibilities at an early age
    7. Inadequate coping skills
    8. Exposure to abuse as a child
    9. High financial and emotional dependence upon a vulnerable

         elder
    10. Lack of support
    11. Unsympathetic or negative attitudes toward patients/residents
    12. Chronic staffing problems
    13. Lack of administrative oversight, staff burnout, and stressful

         working conditions
D. Identify patient/resident safety and abuse prevention techniques

    1. Effective monitoring systems
    2. Institutional policies and procedures regarding patient care
    3. Training on elder abuse and neglect for employees
    4. Education and clear guidance on durable power of attorney

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 8 of 14
Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse

         and how it is to be used                                                                           Page 9 of 14
    5. Promoting regular visits by family members, volunteers, and

         social workers
    6. Coordination of resources and services among community

         agencies and organizations
E. Explain how to prevent violations of elder abuse and discuss

    techniques to rectify situations that could possibly lead to abuse
    1. Provide services to relieve the burden of caregiving, such as

         housekeeping and meal preparation, respite care, education,
         support groups, and day care
    2. Estate planning including
         a. Living will
         b. Revocable trust
         c. Durable power of attorney for healthcare and/or asset

              management
    3. Not signing documents without first consulting an attorney or

         family member you trust
    4. Not provide personal information (e.g. social security number,

         credit card)
    5. Tear up or shred credit card receipts, bank statements, and

         financial records before disposing of them
    6. If you hire someone for personal assistance services, in home

         care services, etc. ensure that they have been properly
         screened with criminal background checks completed
F. Review Mandated Reporter Role
    1. Define facility, state, and federal policies and procedures
         related elder abuse
G. Identify Self-care Techniques (Caregiver)
    1. Caregiver may need to be available around the clock to fix
         meals, provide nursing care, take care of laundry and
         cleaning, drive to doctors' appointments, and pay bills, which
         contributes to caregiver stress
    2. Make sure you have time to rest and take care of your needs
    3. Ask a family member or friend to help out for a weekend, or
         even for a few hours, so that you can take some time for
         yourself

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018
                                                                        Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse

    4. ARCH National Respite Network and Resource                       A. Lecture/Discussion       A. Written test
         Center's National Respite Locator to find respite services in                              B. Class participation
         your area                                                      B. Handout 2.5-
                                                                            Abuse Reporting
    5. Caregiving support groups may also help                              Form- SOC 341.
    6. Exercise could even help with stress
H. Identify and discuss specific techniques for preventing escalation   C. Video "Your Legal
    of potential abuse situations                                           Duty: Reporting Elder
Objective 5:                                                                and Dependant Adult
                                                                            Abuse" Fax requests
Describe the Nurse Assistant role in reporting elder abuse                  to Bureau of Medi-
                                                                            Cal Fraud and Elder
and/or patients'/residents' rights violations                               Abuse. FAX: 916-
                                                                            263-2565.
A. Review types of elder abuse and/or patients'/residents' rights           Downloadable
    violations (refer to objective 2 &3)                                    publications from CA
                                                                            Attorney General's
B. Reporting                                                                office available at
    1. Discuss your observations with a licensed nurse and/or other         www.safestate.org/pu
         appropriate personnel                                              bli cations
         1) If Nurse Assistant observes the abuse incident, the
              Nurse Assistant is responsible for reporting; mandated    D. Bureau of Medi-Cal
              reporter                                                      Fraud and Elder
         2) LVN or RN may assist the Nurse Assistant in completing          Abuse
              mandated forms and in submitting required forms to            http://ag.ca.gov/bmfea
              reporting agencies                                            /el der.php
    2. Report observations as a mandated reporter, following federal
         mandate for reporting suspected or actual elder abuse and/or   E. Red Flags of Abuse
         patients'/residents' rights violations                             located at
    3. Follow agency policies regarding abuse reporting                     https://ncea.acl.gov/N
    4. Follow up on reported incident with licensed personnel               CEA/media/docs/Red-
    5. Reporting Resources                                                  Flags-of-Elder-Abuse-
         1) Adult Protective Services (APS)                                 English.pdf
         2) Long-Term Care Ombudsmen
         3) Eldercare Locator
         4) National Center on Elder Abuse (NCEA)

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 10 of 14
                                                                                          Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse

Sample Test: Module 17 Elder Abuse

    1. The following statements about abuse are true except:
         a. Abuse is making judgements before knowing the patient/resident situation.
         b. Abuse is a punishable crime.
         c. Abuse is a willful act that causes harm or injury to the patient/resident.
         d. Abuse is depriving a person of goods and services needed to maintain health.

    2. Threatening to touch the person's body without the person's consent is:
         a. Assault
         b. Battery
         c. Defamation
         d. False Imprisonment

    3. Restraining a person's movement is:
         a. Neglect
         b. Invasion of privacy
         c. Defamation
         d. False Imprisonment

    4. Sharing a person's photos on a social media site is:
         a. Fraud
         b. Allowed with the family's consent
         c. A HIPAA Violation
         d. Allowed if you obtained consent

    5. Who is most at risk for being wounded, attacked, or assaulted?
         a. A teenager
         b. A single mother
         c. A caregiver
         d. An older adult

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 11 of 14
                                                                              Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse

6. You scold an older person for not eating their dinner. This is a form of:
    a. Physical abuse
    b. Neglect
    c. Battery
    d. Verbal abuse

7. You leave your patient before completing your assignment and the patient's/resident's care. This is abuse by:
    a. Abandonment
    b. Neglect
    c. Involuntary seclusion
    d. Battery

8. You fall asleep at work. This is:
    a. Abandonment
    b. Neglect
    c. Malpractice
    d. Emotional abuse

9. Which is a sign of elder abuse?
    a. Stiff joints and joint pain
    b. Weight gain
    c. Poor personal hygiene
    d. Forgetfulness

10. An older adult has a black eye, bruises on their face, bite marks on on their arms. These are signs of:
    a. Physical abuse
    b. Sexual abuse
    c. Neglect
    d. Verbal abuse

    11. You suspect a patient/resident has been abused. What should you do?                                       Page 12 of 14
         a. Tell the nurse

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018
                                                                                           Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse

b. Call the police
c. Tell the family
d. Ask the person about the abuse

12. Failure to exercise the degree of care considered reasonable in a given situation is:
    a. Malpractice
    b. Neglect,
    c. Coercion
    d. Physical abuse

13. You overhear another nurse assistant raise their voice loudly in a threatening manner when speaking to their patient/resident.
    The nurse assistant is guilty of:
    a. Neglect
    b. Physical abuse
    c. Verbal abuse
    d. Invasion of privacy

14. Your patient/resident offers you a dollar to thank you for picking up a newspaper for him. Your best response would be to:
    a. Ignore the money and pretend not to see it
    b. Take the money as you earned it
    c. Report the event to the doctor
    d. Politely refuse because tipping is not allowed

15. T F  A patient may not refuse any treatment prescribed by the doctor
16. T F  Every patient/resident has the right to considerate and respectful care
17. T F  Anxiety can make a patient/resident very demanding
18. T F  You fail to follow an order to encourage fluids for your patient/resident. You are guilty of neglect.
19. T F  If an error occurs as the nurse assistant gives care, the nurse assistant should report it when they think about it
20. T F  A patient/resident gives up their right to privacy when they are admitted to a healthcare facility

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 13 of 14
                                               Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse

Sample Test Answer Key: Module 17 Elder Abuse
                             1. A
                             2. A
                             3. D
                             4. C
                             5. D
                             6. D
                             7. A
                             8. A
                             9. C
                             10. A
                             11. A
                             12. B
                             13. C
                             14. D
                             15. F
                             16. T
                             17. T
                             18. T
                             19. F
                             20. F

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 14 of 14
