                                                                                           Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights
Minimum Number of Theory Hours: 3
Suggested Theory Hours: 5
Recommended Clinical Hours: 1

Statement of Purpose:
The purpose of this unit is to introduce the Nurse Assistant to patient/resident rights. The fundamental principle behind
patient/resident rights is that each patient/resident is a member of a family and of society as a whole. They must be cared for in a
manner that protects their rights and meets the individual family, psychosocial and spiritual needs in a long-term care setting. These
rights are protected by federal and state regulations.

Terminology:                      13. Ethical standard                                     26. Ombudsman
1. Abuse                          14. False imprisonment                                   27. Physical abuse
2. Advance Directive              15. Financial abuse                                      28. Policy and Procedure
3. Aiding and abetting            16. Grievances                                           29. Privacy
4. Assault                        17. HIPAA                                                30. Psychological abuse
5. Battery                        18. Informed consent                                     31. Resident council
6. Choice                         19. Involuntary seclusion                                32. Restraints
7. Chronic                        20. Laws                                                 33. Scope of practice
8. Coercion                       21. Legal standard                                       34. Sexual abuse
9. Confidential                   22. Libel                                                35. Slander
10. Defamation                    23. Mandated reporter                                    36. Social services
11. Defamation of character       24. Neglect                                              37. Theft
12. Do Not Resuscitate (DNR)/ No  25. Negligence                                           38. Verbal abuse

    Code

Patient, resident, and client are synonymous terms referring to the person receiving care

Performance Standards (Objectives):
Upon completion of the three (3) hours of class plus homework assignments and one (1) hour of clinical experience, the learner will
be able to:

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018           Page 1 of 23
                                                                                                                                    Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

1. Define key terminology
2. Explain the purpose of a long-term care facility
3. Recognize the role of the Nurse Assistant in maintaining patient/resident rights, as stated in federal and state regulation
4. Compare California Code of Regulations Title 22, Division 5, Chapter 3, 72527, with Title 42 Code of Federal Regulations 483.10

    regarding patient/resident rights
5. Explain the Nurse Assistant role in preventing negligent acts and violation of patient/resident rights
6. Describe the Nurse Assistant role in reporting patient/resident rights violations
7. Describe the role of an ombudsman
8. Identify examples of patient/resident rights, which support a patient's/resident's need for security, belonging and self-esteem

References:

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 2 of 23
                 Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

1. Acello, B. & Hegner, B. (2016). Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage Learning.
2. Acello, B. (2016). Workbook to accompany: Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage

    Learning
3. CA Attorney General's publications available at https://www.safestates.org/page/Publications
4. California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 5, Chapter 3, Section 72527 (2014). Patients'/Residents' Rights.

    http://carules.claws.us/code/t.22_d.5_ch.3_art5_sec.72527
5. California Department of Public Health (CDPH) Nursing Home Residents' Rights

    https://www.cdph.ca.gov/Programs/CHCQ/LCP/Pages/NursingHomeResidentsRights.aspx

6. California Health and Safety Code, Sections 1599.1, 1599.2, 1599.3 http://www.search-california-
    law.com/research/section/ca/HSC/4.25/index.html

7. Carter, P. J. (2017). Lippincott Essentials for Nursing Assistants: a Humanistic Approach to Caregiving. (4th ed.) Philadelphia,
    PA. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

8. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 42, 483.1, 483.12, 483.13, 483.15 https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2017-title42-
    vol5/xml/CFR-2017-title42-vol5-part483.xml

9. Deck, M. L. (2004). Instant Teaching Tools for the New Millennium. St Louis, MO. Mosby
10. Hedman, S. A., Fuzy, J., & Rymer, S. (2018). Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque, NM.

    Hartman Publishing, Inc.
11. Hartman Publishing. (2018). Workbook for Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque, NM.

    Hartman Publishing, Inc.
12. Haroun, L. & Royce, S. (2004). Teaching Ideas and Activities for Health Care. Albany, NY. Delmar Publishers
13. HIPAA Regulations https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/index.html
14. Patient's Bill of Rights from Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services https://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Programs-and-

    Initiatives/Health-Insurance-Market-Reforms/Patients-Bill-of-Rights.html
15. Pearson Vue (2018) California Nurse Assistant Candidate Handbook for National Nurse Aide Assessment Program. Philadelphia,

    PA. Pearson Education, Inc.
16. Sorrentino, S. A., Remmert, L., & and Kelly, R. (2018) Workbook and Competency Evaluation Review for Moby's Textbook for

    Nursing Assistants (9th ed.) St. Louis, MO. Mosby Company
17. Sorrentino, S.A. and Remmert, L. (2018) Mosby's Textbook for Nursing Assistants. (9th ed.). St Louis, MO. Elsevier
18. The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987, 1989, 1990.1993

       1987- https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2671955

       1989- 1990- https://www.congress.gov/bill/101st-congress/house-bill/3299/text

       1993- https://www.congress.gov/bill/103rd-congress/house-bill/2264
19. Weaver, L. & Wilding, M. (2013) The Dimensions of Engaged Teaching: a Practical Guide for Educators. Bloomington, IN.

    Solution Tree Press

Content Outline  Recommended Teaching Clinical Demonstration/

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 3 of 23
                                                                      Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

Objective 1                                                                   Strategies and            Method of Evaluation
Define key terminology.                                                        Assignments
A. Review the terms listed in the terminology section                                                A. Have students select
B. Spell the listed terms accurately                                  A. Lecture/Discussion              five words from the list
C. Pronounce the terms correctly                                      B. Games: word searches,           of key terminology and
D. Use the terms in their proper context                                                                 write a sentence for
                                                                          crossword puzzles,             each defining the term
Objective 2                                                               Family Feud, Jeopardy,
Explain the purpose of a long-term care facility.                         bingo, spelling bee,       B. Administer vocabulary
A. Provide physical care                                                  hangman, and                   pre-test and post-test
B. Provide focused care for patients/residents with special needs         concentration
C. Provide a team approach to care and services                       C. Encourage use of            C. Uses appropriate
D. Prevent illness/injury and loss of function                            internet, medical              terminology when
E. Promote recovery and health in a setting that serves as both care      dictionary, and                charting and reporting to
                                                                          textbooks                      licensed personnel
    facility and residence                                            D. Create flashcards
F. Assist patient/resident in reaching their maximum potential both                                  A. Written test
                                                                      A. Lecture/Discussion          B. Class participation
    physically and mentally                                           B. Arrange for tour of a
Objective 3:                                                                                         A. Written test
Recognize the role of the Nurse Assistant in maintaining                  long-term care facility    B. Class participation
patient/resident rights, as stated in federal and state regulations.  C. Arrange for a guest         C. Locate facility policies,
A. The Nurse Assistant is responsible for being familiar with
                                                                          speaker from a long-           procedures, and
    regulations that provide for patient/resident rights and for          term care facility             patient/resident rights
    assisting patients/residents to exercise their rights                                                documents
B. Patient/resident rights are protected by federal regulations for   A. Lecture/Discussion          D. Consistently promotes
    long-term care facilities                                         B. Locate facility policies,
C. Title 42, Code of Federal Regulations
Resident Rights (483.10): Residents living in a health care facility      procedures, and
                                                                          patient/resident rights
                                                                          documents
                                                                      C. Role-play a situation that
                                                                          involves a threat to

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 4 of 23
                                                                                                     Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

should have the same rights as those held by all U.S. Citizens.             patient/resident rights  patient/resident rights
    1. Residents have the right to be free of interference, coercion,
         discrimination, or reprisal from the facility in exercising their
         rights. They include:
         a. Quality of life
              1) Residents have the right to the best care available
              2) Dignity, choice and independence are important
         b. Services and activities to maintain high level of wellness
              1) Residents must have the correct care that should keep
                   them as healthy as possible every day
              2) Health should not decline as a direct result of the
                   facility's care
         c. The right to be fully informed about rights and services
              1) Residents must be told what care and services are
                   available
              2) They must be told the charges for each service
              3) Legal rights must be explained in a language they
                   understand, a written copy is given to them
                   a) Right to be notified in advance of any room change
                        or roommate
                   b) Right to communicate with someone who speaks
                        their language
                   c) Right to obtain assistance for any sensory
                        impairment, e.g., blindness
              4) Informed consent is a concept that goes along with
                   this. A person has the right to direct what happens to
                   his or her body
         d. The right to make independent choices
              1) Residents have the right to make choices about their
                   doctors, care and treatments
              2) Rights to make personal decisions. These include
                   what to wear and how to spend their time. They can
                   join in community activities, both inside, and outside
                   the nursing home
         e. The right to privacy and confidentiality
              1) Residents can expect privacy with care given. Their

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 5 of 23
Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

                   medical and personal information cannot be shared                                        Page 6 of 23
                   with anyone but the healthcare team
              2) Residents have the right to private, unrestricted
                   communication with anyone they choose (HIPAA
                   protects residents' privacy)
         f. The right to dignity, respect and freedom
              1) Resident must be treated with dignity by caregivers
              2) They cannot be abused in any way
         g. The right to security of possessions
              1) Resident's personal possessions must be safe at all
                   times. They cannot be taken or used by anyone
                   without resident's permission
              2) Residents have the right to manage their own finances
         h. The right to complain
              1) Residents have the right to complain without fear or
                   punishment
              2) Facility must quickly try to resolve complaints
         i. The right to participate in their own care
         j. The right to visits, receive mail, and telephone calls
D. Admission, Transfer and Discharge (483.12):
    1. Residents have the rights to stay in a facility unless a transfer
         or discharge is needed. Location changes must be made
         safely and with resident knowledge and consent
    2. Policies related to the admission of the resident must be
         based on the ability to provide adequate care
    3. Those policies for transfer and discharge activities must be
         based on the resident's needs and welfare, concern for the
         safety and welfare of other residents, or as a result of
         nonpayment for services
         a. Transfer and discharge requirements
              1) Notice of 7 days bed-hold policy and readmission
                   requirements
              2) Equal access to quality care regardless of payment
         b. Admission policy
              1) Resident care policies
              2) 30 days' notification prior to permanent discharge

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018
Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

E. Resident Behavior and Facility Practices (483.13)                                                        Page 7 of 23
    1. The resident has the right to be free from any physical
         restraints imposed, or from psychoactive drugs that are
         administered for the purpose of discipline or convenience and
         are not required for treatment of the resident's medical
         symptoms
    2. Restraint
         a. Physical (i.e. soft belt, bed rails, geri-chair, mittens, soft
              ties, locked wheelchair, lap buddy-if cannot be removed by
              patient)
         b. Chemical (i.e. psychotropic drugs)
    3. Freedom from abuse
         a. Financial; stealing or borrowing items or accepting gifts
         b. Verbal; teasing, profanity, racial slanders, threats
         c. Sexual; overtures, innuendo, gestures, inappropriate
              touching
         d. Physical; battery, kicking, biting, hitting, shoving, pulling
              hair, rough handling
         e. Psychological; ridiculing, ignoring, manipulating
         f. Involuntary seclusion; isolation
         g. Abandonment; leaving someone unattended
         h. Neglect; failure to provide care that a reasonable person
              would provide. (i.e. not answering call light, smells of urine
              and not being cleaned/changed)

F. Role of Nurse Assistant
    1. Self-care; personal stress management (i.e. identify
         stressors), take breaks, take lunch, proper nutrition, exercise,
         sleep, support network of family and friends, seek out
         professional intervention as needed
    2. Communication with supervisors
    3. Identify resident abuse; signs and symptoms, suspected,
         verbal account, witnessed or known
    4. Mandated reporter; SOC341 (reporting form), aiding and
         abetting, ombudsman, California Department of Public Health
         (CDPH)
    5. Documentation

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018
                                                                        Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

G. Quality of Life (483.15)                                             A. Lecture/Discussion        A. Written test
    1. The resident must be cared for in a manner and in an             B. Handout 2.4a: California  B. Class participation
         environment that promotes maintenance or enhancement of
         each resident's quality of life                                    Code of Regulations,
    2. Care and environment includes:                                       Title 22, Division 5,
         a. Dignity                                                         Chapter 3, 72527
         b. Self-determination and participation                        C. Handout 2.4b- California
         c. Participation in resident and family groups                     Health and Safety Code
         d. Participation in other activities
         e. Accommodation of needs
         f. Activities
         g. Social Services
         h. Personal living environment
    3. Identify environmental and personal living area hazards to
         prevent incidents and/or accidents

Objective 4:

Compare California Code of Regulations Title 22, Division 5,

Chapter 3, 72527, with Title 42 Code of Federal Regulations

483.10 regarding patient/resident rights.

A. Residents shall be encouraged/assisted to exercise their rights as
    a patient and as a citizen, 72527(a). Written policies regarding
    patient rights must be established and available
    1. Patient must be informed of rights, rules and regulations
         regarding patient conduct
    2. Patient must be informed of services and charges
    3. Patient must be informed of medical condition by doctor and
         have opportunity to participate in planning of medical
         treatment
    4. Patient can refuse treatment and be informed of
         consequences (informed consent)
    5. Patient can be transferred or discharged only for medical
         reasons, welfare, other patients' welfare, or for nonpayment
    6. Patient shall be assisted to exercise rights, voice grievances,
         recommend changes in policy and services, have outside
         representation, and freedom from restraint, interference,
         coercion, discrimination and reprisal

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 8 of 23
Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

    7. Patient allowed to manage their personal finances                                                    Page 9 of 23
    8. Patient has right to be free from mental and physical abuse

         and chemical and physical restraints
    9. Confidential treatment of records

         a. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
              (HIPAA)

         b. Standards and safeguards for documentation and
              transmission of health records to assure privacy and
              security of this data

    10. Patient has right to be treated with consideration, respect,
         dignity, and individuality, including privacy

    11. Patient has right to not be required to perform work
    12. Patient has right to be able to communicate privately and

         send/receive mail
    13. Patient has right to participate in social or religious activities
    14. Patient has right to be allowed to retain and use personal

         clothing and possessions
    15. If married, to be provided privacy and share a room if both are

         patients in the facility
    16. Patient has right to have daily visiting hours
    17. Patient has right to have visit by clergy at any time
    18. Patient has right to have relatives, or person responsible to

         visit critically ill patient at any time
    19. Patient has right to be allowed privacy for visits
    20. Patient has right to be allowed access to telephone and

         confidential calls
    21. Right to participate in the electoral process - voting
B. Patient rights may only be denied or limited for good cause
    evidenced by doctor's order and may be denied or limited only if
    allowed by law
C. California Health and Safety Code (Skilled Nursing and
    Intermediate Care Facility Patient's Bill of Rights)
    1. [1599.1] Written policies regarding the rights of patients shall

         be established and made available to patient, guardian, next
         of kin, sponsor, and public
         a. In addition to patient rights and obligations defined in the

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018
                                                                        Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

         regulations
         1) The facility shall employ adequate, qualified staff
         2) Assure personal hygiene of patients, including

              prevention of pressure ulcers and incontinence
         3) Provide diet to meet patient needs
         4) Activities and promotion of self-care
    b. The facility shall be clean, sanitary and in good repair
         including the nurses call system
2. [1599.2] Written information informing patients of their rights
    include facility requirements in the Health and Safety Code
    and Title 22.
    a. Violations of either code may be grounds for civil or
         criminal proceedings against the facility or its personnel
    b. Patients have the right to voice grievances free of reprisal
         and to submit complaints to the Department of Public
         Health Services (CDPH)
3. [1599.3] Rights of patients who are determined to be
    incompetent, incapable of understanding, exhibits a
    communication barrier are to be carried out/protected by
    guardian, next of kin, conservator, sponsoring agency or
    representative unless it is the facility

Objective 5                                                             A. Lecture/Discussion          A. Written test
                                                                        B. Video from Textbook         B. Class participation
Describe the Nurse Assistant role in preventing negligent acts          C. Downloadable

and violations patient/resident rights.                                     publications from CA
                                                                            Attorney General's office
A. Explain the difference between negligence and abuse                      available at
B. Recognize the evidence of negligent acts and violations of               https://www.safestates.o
                                                                            rg/page/Publications
    patient/resident rights
C. Explain how to prevent violations of patient/resident rights
D. Define facility, state, and federal policies and procedures related

    to violation of patient/resident rights

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 10 of 23
                                                                                                  Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

Objective 6                                                               D. Lecture/Discussion      A. Written test
                                                                          E. Video from Textbook     B. Class participation
Describe the Nurse Assistant role in reporting patient/resident

rights violations.

A. Identify patient/resident rights violations
B. Discuss your observations with a licensed nurse/appropriate

     personnel
C. Report observations as a mandated reporter, following federal

     mandate for reporting suspected or actual patient/resident rights
     violations
D. Follow up on reported incident with licensed personnel

Objective 7                                                               A. Lecture/Discussion      A. Written test
                                                                          B. Arrange for an          B. Class participation
Describe the role of an ombudsman.
                                                                              ombudsman to speak to  A. Written test
A. Patient advocate and member of the health care team                        the class              B. Class participation
B. Impartial person who investigates complaints and acts as an
                                                                          A. Lecture/Discussion
    advocate for patients/residents and/or families to resolve conflicts  B. Handout 2.7a- Maslow's
C. Legal responsibility of an ombudsman to follow facility protocol
D. Gives information to the public                                            Hierarchy of Needs
                                                                          C. Handout 2.7b- Example
Objective 8
Identify examples of patient/resident rights, which support a                 of Human Needs as
patient's/resident's need for security, belonging, and self-                  related to Maslow
esteem.
A. Physiological

    1. Food
    2. Water
    3. Oxygen
    4. Sleep
    5. Sex
    6. Temperature extremes
B. Safety & Security: asepsis, knowledge of patient's/resident's
    individual needs
    1. Freedom from fear and anxiety
    2. Stability
    3. Consistency in routine
    4. Freedom from pain

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 11 of 23
                                                                       Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

C. Belonging: love and affection
    1. This is the patient's/resident's home
    2. Sense of belonging (psychosocial needs)
    3. Acceptance and love
    4. Receive family, friends, and visitors in home-like environment

D. Self-esteem
    1. Ask opinion and really listen
    2. Feeling competent
    3. Gaining respect, approval and recognition

E. Self-actualization
    1. Pride in accomplishment; opportunity to do their best
    2. Attain full learning, creative, and spiritual potential

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 12 of 23
                                                              Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

Sample Test: Module 2- Patient/Resident Rights

1. The Patient's Bill of Rights is:
    A. Given to patients/residents when they request it
    B. Provided to all patients/residents upon admission
    C. Given to clients who are receiving home care
    D. Not a legal document

2. Consumers of health care are responsible for:
    A. Being honest with the physician
    B. Withholding information from health care providers
    C. Requesting a Nurse Assistant who will care for them
    D. Doing what the physician says

3. Healthcare consumers always have the right to:
    A. Receive respectful and considerate care
    B. Refuse to pay their bill
    C. Select the Nurse Assistant they want to care for them
    D. Have visitors any hour of the day or night

4. Documents that provide instructions about the patient's/resident's wishes for treatment when the patient/resident is unable to
    communicate their wishes are called:
    A. Medical records
    B. Advanced Directives
    C. Resident Bill of Rights
    D. Policies and Procedures

5. Informed consent means that the:                                                                         Page 13 of 23
    A. Physician makes all health care decisions for the patient/resident
    B. The nurse makes some decisions for the patient/resident
    C. The patient/resident makes decisions based on full disclosure of procedures, benefits, and risks
    D. The patient/resident is old enough to sign for treatment

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018
                                                                                                                     Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

6. A grievance is:
    A. A form the patient/resident fills out when they have a complaint
    B. Denial of services or treatment due to insurance
    C. Patient/resident refusing to pay a bill
    D. A complaint

7. Healthcare workers:
    A. Do not need to know the Patient's Bill of Rights
    B. Should refer questions about "rights" to the admissions coordinator
    C. Must not discuss patient/resident rights because of confidentiality concerns
    D. Must be familiar with the Patient's Bill of Rights

8. When an elderly person is admitted to the long-term care facility, they have the right to:
    A. Have relatives stay overnight in their room
    B. Have personal items in their room
    C. Have the kitchen prepare food for them on their request
    D. Bring their pet with them

9. The rights of patients/residents in long Łterm care facilities:
    A. Were legislated by OBRA in 1987
    B. Include the right to make independent medical choices
    C. Are more restrictive than rights in other healthcare settings
    D. Do not include informed consent

10. The purpose of a long-term care facility is to:
    A. Provide care for persons who cannot care for themselves at home
    B. Provide emergency care for the elderly
    C. Provide surgical care for the elderly
    D. Keep elderly people together and away from other age groups

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 14 of 23
                                                                                                                     Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

11. A resident has been at home with his family all day. The Nurse Assistant notices new bruises on the patient's/resident's back
    when he returns. The Nurse Assistant should:
    A. Report the bruises to the licensed nurse
    B. Ask family members the next time they visit
    C. Say nothing to the patient/resident about the bruises
    D. Wait to see if it happens again

True or False

12. _____ The Nurse Assistant does not need to be familiar with the Patient's Bill of Rights.
13. _____ The patient/resident has the right to be free from restraints.
14. _____ The patient/resident has the right to know about his or her diagnosis and prognosis.
15. _____ The patient/resident has the right to refuse treatment.
16. _____ The patient/resident has the right to know if a student is providing care for him or her.
17. _____ The patient/resident has the right to know the cost of care.
18. _____ If a visitor asks you a question about a patient's/resident's medical condition, it is alright to tell

              them.
19. _____ You may be found guilty of invasion of privacy if you open a patient's/resident's mail.
20. _____ Upon admission to the long-term care facility, the patient/resident should receive notices of

              right, rules, and services.
21. _____ An ombudsman is someone who helps resolve grievances between a patient's/resident's

              family and the facility.
22. _____ An Advance Directive is part of the admission process and is required.

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 15 of 23
                                                                   Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

Matching

          A. Patient/Resident Rights       E. Grievance
          B. Confidentiality               F. Advanced Directive
          C. Client's Rights in Home Care  G. Corporal Punishment
          D. Informed Consent              H. HIPAA

23. _____ Not revealing private information
24. _____ Standards and safeguards for documentation and transmission of patient health

              records
25. _____ Use of physical force
26. _____ The document that guarantees the rights of the consumer of home care facilities
27. _____ Complaint
28. _____ The document that guarantees the rights of the consumer in a long-term care facility
29. _____ A document that states the patient's/resident's wishes for care in the event they are unable to
30. _____ Permission given for care after the procedures have been explained

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 16 of 23
                                                               Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

Sample Test Answers: Module 2- Patient/Resident Rights  16. T
                                                        17. T
1. B                                                    18. F
2. A                                                    19. T
3. A                                                    20. T
4. B                                                    21. F
5. C                                                    22. F
6. D                                                    23. B
7. D                                                    24. H
8. B                                                    25. G
9. B                                                    26. C
10. A                                                   27. E
11. A                                                   28. A
12. F                                                   29. F
13. T                                                   30. D
14. T
15. T

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 17 of 23
                                                                        Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 5, Chapter 3, 72527

Patients/Residents have the rights enumerated in this section and the facility shall ensure that these rights are not violated. The
facility shall establish and implement written policies and procedures which include these rights and shall make a copy of these
policies available to the patient and to any representative of the patient. The policies shall be accessible to the public upon
request. Patients shall have the right:

1. To be fully informed, as evidenced by the patient's written acknowledgement prior to or at the time of admission and
    during stay, of these rights and of all rules and regulations governing patient conduct.

2. To be fully informed, prior to or at the time of admission and during stay, of services available in the facility and of related
    charges, including any charges for services not covered by the facility's basic per diem rate or not covered under Titles
    XVIII or XIX of the Social Security Act.

3. To be fully informed by a physician of his or her total health status and to be afforded the opportunity to participate on an
    immediate and ongoing basis in the total plan of care including the identification of medical, nursing and psychosocial
    needs and the planning of related services.

4. To consent to or to refuse any treatment or procedure or participation in experimental research.
5. To receive all information that is material to an individual patient's decision concerning whether to accept or refuse any

    proposed treatment or procedure. The disclosure of material information for administration of psychotherapeutic drugs or
    physical restraints or the prolonged use of a device that may lead to the inability to regain use of a normal bodily function
    shall include the disclosure of information listed in Section 72528(b).
6. To be transferred or discharged only for medical reasons, or the patient's welfare or that of other patients or for
    nonpayment for his or her stay and to be given reasonable advance notice to ensure orderly transfer or discharge. Such
    actions shall be documented in the patient's health record.
7. To be encouraged and assisted throughout the period of stay to exercise rights as a patient and as a citizen, and to this
    end to voice grievances and recommend changes in policies and services to facility staff and/or outside representatives of
    the patient's choice, free from restraint, interference, coercion, discrimination or reprisal.
8. To be free from discrimination based on sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, sexual orientation, disability,
    medical condition, marital status, or registered domestic partner status.
9. To manage personal financial affairs, or to be given at least a quarterly accounting of financial transactions made on the
    patient's behalf should the facility accept written delegation of this responsibility subject to the provisions of Section
    72529.
10. To be free from mental and physical abuse.
11. To be assured confidential treatment of financial and health records and to approve or refuse their release, except as
    authorized by law.
12. To be treated with consideration, respect and full recognition of dignity and individuality, including privacy in treatment and
    in care of personal needs.

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 18 of 23
Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

13. Not to be required to perform services for the facility that are not included for therapeutic purposes in the patient's plan of
    care.

14. To associate and communicate privately with persons of the patient's choice, and to send and receive personal mail
    unopened.

15. To meet with others and participate in activities of social, religious and community groups.
16. To retain and use personal clothing and possessions as space permits, unless to do so would infringe upon the health,

    safety or rights of the patient or other patients.
17. If married or registered as a domestic partner, to be assured privacy for visits by the patient's spouse or registered

    domestic partner and if both are patients in the facility, to be permitted to share a room.
18. To have daily visiting hours established.
19. To have visits from members of the clergy at any time at the request of the patient or the patient's representative.
20. To have visits from persons of the patient's choosing at any time if the patient is critically ill, unless medically

    contraindicated.
21. To be allowed privacy for visits with family, friends, clergy, social workers or for professional or business purposes.
22. To have reasonable access to telephones and to make and receive confidential calls.
23. To be free from any requirement to purchase drugs or rent or purchase medical supplies or equipment from any particular

    source in accordance with the provisions of Section 1320 of the Health and Safety Code.
24. To be free from psychotherapeutic drugs and physical restraints used for the purpose of patient discipline or staff

    convenience and to be free from psychotherapeutic drugs used as a chemical restraint as defined in Section 72018,
    except in an emergency which threatens to bring immediate injury to the patient or others. If a chemical restraint is
    administered during an emergency, such medication shall be only that which is required to treat the emergency condition
    and shall be provided in ways that are least restrictive of the personal liberty of the patient and used only for a specified
    and limited period of time.
25. Other rights as specified in Health and Safety Code, Section 1599.1.
26. Other rights as specified in Welfare and Institutions Code, Sections 5325 and 5325.1, for persons admitted for psychiatric
    evaluations or treatment.
27. Other rights as specified in Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 4502, 4503 and 4505 for patients who are
    developmentally disabled as defined in Section 4512 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.
    (a) A patient's rights, as set forth above, may only be denied or limited if such denial or limitation is otherwise authorized

        by law. Reasons for denial or limitation of such rights shall be documented in the patient's health record.
    (b) If a patient lacks the ability to understand these rights and the nature and consequences of proposed treatment, the

        patient's representative shall have the rights specified in this section to the extent the right may devolve to another,
        unless the representative's authority is otherwise limited. The patient's incapacity shall be determined by a court in
        accordance with state law or by the patient's physician unless the physician's determination is disputed by the patient
        or patient's representative.
    (c) Persons who may act as the patient's representative include a conservator, as authorized by Parts 3 and 4 of Division
        4 of the Probate Code (commencing with Section 1800), a person designated as attorney in fact in the patient's valid

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 19 of 23
                                                                                                                     Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

            Durable Power of Attorney for Health Care, patient's next of kin, other appropriate surrogate decision maker
            designated consistent with statutory and case law, a person appointed by a court authorizing treatment pursuant to
            Part 7 (commencing with Section 3200) of Division 4 of the Probate Code, or, if the patient is a minor, a person
            lawfully authorized to represent the minor.
        (d) Patients' rights policies and procedures established under this section concerning consent, informed consent and
            refusal of treatments or procedures shall include, but not be limited to the following:
             1. How the facility will verify that informed consent was obtained or a treatment or procedure was refused pertaining

                 to the administration of psychotherapeutic drugs or physical restraints or the prolonged use of a device that may
                 lead to the inability of the patient to regain the use of a normal bodily function.
             2. How the facility, in consultation with the patient's physician, will identify consistent with current statutory case law,
                 who may serve as a patient's representative when an incapacitated patient has no conservator or attorney in fact
                 under a valid Durable Power of Attorney for Health Care.

Note: Authority cited: Sections 1275 and 131200, Health and Safety Code. Reference: Section 51, Civil Code; Sections 297
and 297.5, Family Code; Sections 1276, 1320, 1599, 1599.1, 1599.2, 1599.3, 131050, 131051 and 131052, Health and Safety
Code; and Cobbs v. Grant (1972) 8 Cal.3d 229.

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 20 of 23
                                                                                                                     Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

California Health and Safety Code

                                          (Skilled Nursing and Intermediate Care Facility Patient's Bill of Rights)

1599.1  Written policies regarding the rights of patients shall be established and made available to patient, guardian, next of
1599.2  kin, sponsor, and public. In addition to patient rights and obligations defined in the regulations, the facility shall
1599.3  employ adequate, qualified staff; assure personal hygiene of patients including prevention of decubiti and
        incontinence, provide diet to meet patient needs; activities and promotion of self-care. The facility shall be clean,
        sanitary and in good repair, including nurses call system.

        Written information informing patients of their rights include facility requirements in the Health and Safety Code and
        Title 22. Violations of either code may be grounds for civil or criminal proceedings against the facility or its personnel.
        Patients have the right to voice grievances free of reprisal and to submit complaints to the Department of Health
        Services.

        Rights of patients who are determined to be incompetent, incapable of understanding, exhibits a communication
        barrier are to be carried out/protected by guardian, next of kin, conservator, sponsoring agency or representative
        unless it is the facility. Guidelines for Reporting to Team Leader.

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 21 of 23
Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 22 of 23
                                                                                                                    Module 2: Patient/Resident Rights

                                       Example of Human Needs as Related to Maslow

                                                                                   Winning
                                                                                    games
                                                                                  Original
                                                                                   paintings
                                                                                The pride of
                                                                                rehabilitation

                                                                                Self-actualization

                                                                                Laughing at         keeping your

                                                                                my old jokes  promise to me

                                                                                Accomplishing

                                                                                agenda behavior

                                       Asking my opinion                                      Never making fun of me

                                                                                Listening to me

                                                                                Self-esteem

                                       Caring when I hurt                                     Holding my hand or hugging me

                                       Admiring my grandchildren                              You're thinking about what

                                                                                I may want or need

                                                                                              Love

                                       Washing your hands before you                                Shutting off the air conditioning
                                                   touch me                                            when my arthritis hurts

                                       Using a gait belt when you                                          Finding the bone in my creamed
                                              help me walk                                                chicken before giving me my tray

                                                                                Safety & Security

Illustration from The Nurse Assistant  Keeping me clean and caring for my skin                                    Stopping to give me a drink of water
 in Long-Term Care: A Rehabilitative
Approach, by Hazel Castillo, RN., BA,  Finding me an extra blanket at night                         Feeding me everything served even though I am slow

  MSG., pg. 409 Copyright 1992 by                                               Physical Needs
         Mosby- year book, Inc.

Reproduced by permission of Mosby

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018                                              Page 23 of 23
