                                                                                           Module 16: Death and Dying

Module 16: Death and Dying
Minimum Number of Theory Hours: 2
Recommended Clinical Hours: 0

Statement of Purpose:
The Nurse Assistant is introduced to the various stages of the grieving process and physical signs of approaching death. This unit
introduces death as a normal stage of life. The health care provider must recognize the physical, psychological, and spiritual needs
of the patient/resident during this period to understand coping mechanisms and provide support to the patient/resident and family
members.

Terminology                        14. Hospice
1. Acceptance                      15. Living will
2. Advanced directives             16. Morgue
3. Apnea                           17. Mottling
4. Anger                           18. Palliative care
5. Artificial hydration/nutrition  19. Patient Care Self-Determination Act
6. Autopsy                         20. Postmortem care
7. Bargaining                      21. Prognosis
8. Cachexia                        22. Reminiscence
9. Cheyne-stokes respirations      23. Reincarnation
10. Denial                         24. Rigor mortis
11. Depression                     25. Shroud
12. Do Not Resuscitate (DNR)       26. Terminal
13. Durable power of attorney

Patient, resident, and client are synonymous terms referring to the person receiving care

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 1 of 17
                                                                                                   Module 16: Death and Dying

Performance Standards (Objectives):

Upon completion of the two hours of class plus homework assignments, the learner will be able to:

1. Define key terminology
2. Describe the five stages of the grieving process according to Dr. Kubler-Ross
3. Describe approaches to meet common emotional and spiritual needs of terminally ill patients/residents and their families
4. List the rights of the dying patient/resident
5. Differentiate between common signs of approaching death and biological death
6. Identify care and comfort measures for dying patients/residents
7. Identify the philosophy and goals of hospice and the Nurse Assistant's role when the patient/resident is cared for by a licensed

    hospice nurse
8. Describe procedures and responsibilities for postmortem care

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 2 of 17
                                                                                                                                             Module 16: Death and Dying
References:

    1. Acello, B. & Hegner, B. (2016). Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage Learning.
    2. Acello, B. (2016). Workbook to accompany: Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage

         Learning
    3. Carter, P. J. (2017). Lippincott Essentials for Nursing Assistants: a Humanistic Approach to Caregiving. (4th ed.) Philadelphia,

         PA. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
    4. Deck, M. L. (2004). Instant Teaching Tools for the New Millennium. St Louis, MO. Mosby
    5. Hedman, S. A., Fuzy, J., & Rymer, S. (2018). Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque, NM.

         Hartman Publishing, Inc.
    6. Hartman Publishing. (2018). Workbook for Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque, NM.

         Hartman Publishing, Inc.
    7. Haroun, L. & Royce, S. (2004). Teaching Ideas and Activities for Health Care. Albany, NY. Delmar Publishers
    8. Pearson Vue (2018) California Nurse Assistant Candidate Handbook for National Nurse Aide Assessment Program. Philadelphia,

         PA. Pearson Education, Inc.
    9. Sorrentino, S. A., Remmert, L., & and Kelly, R. (2018) Workbook and Competency Evaluation Review for Moby's Textbook for

         Nursing Assistants (9th ed.) St. Louis, MO. Mosby Company
    10. Sorrentino, S.A. and Remmert, L. (2018) Mosby's Textbook for Nursing Assistants. (9th ed.). St Louis, MO. Elsevier
    11. Weaver, L. & Wilding, M. (2013) The Dimensions of Engaged Teaching: a Practical Guide for Educators. Bloomington, IN.

         Solution Tree Press.

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 3 of 17
                                   Content Outline              Recommended Teaching        Module 16: Death and Dying
                                                                       Strategies and
Objective 1                                                             Assignments         Clinical Demonstration/
Define key terminology.                                                                      Method of Evaluation
A. Review the terms listed in the terminology section
B. Spell the listed terms accurately                            A. Lecture/Discussion       A. Have students select
C. Pronounce the terms correctly                                B. Games: word searches,        five words from the list
D. Use the terms in their proper context                                                        of key terminology and
                                                                    crossword puzzles,          write a sentence for
Objective 2                                                         Family Feud, Jeopardy,      each defining the term
Describe the five stages of grieving according to Dr. Kubler-       bingo, spelling bee,
Ross.                                                               hangman, and            B. Administer vocabulary
A. Denial                                                           concentration               pre-test and post-test
B. Anger                                                        C. Encourage use of
C. Bargaining                                                       internet, medical       C. Uses appropriate
D. Depression                                                       dictionary, and             terminology when
E. Acceptance                                                       textbooks                   charting and reporting to
                                                                D. Create flashcards for        licensed personnel
Objective 3                                                         learning purposes
Describe approaches to meet common emotional and spiritual
needs of terminally ill patients/residents and their families.  A. Lecture/Discussion       A. Written test
A. Emotional needs of the dying                                 B. Handout 13.2 Timeline    B. Class participation

    1. Contact with loved ones                                      of Life
                                                                C. "The Death Exercise" in

                                                                    Instant Teaching Tools
                                                                    for the New Millennium
                                                                    by Michele Deck

                                                                A. Lecture/Discussion       A. Written test
                                                                B. Role play providing      B. Displays supportive

                                                                    support to family of        behaviors when caring

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 3 of 17
         a. Encourage family members to visit                            dying patient/resident.      Module 16: Death and Dying
         b. Provide privacy                                              Practice what to say.
    2. Communication:                                                    This is a difficult skill.     for terminally ill
         a. Listening                                                    Students can give              patients/residents and
         b. Touching                                                     suggestions for what           families
    3. Expression of emotions, i.e. guilt, anger, frustration, anxiety,  words are most
         depression                                                      comforting/supportive
    4. Reminiscence
         a. Recalling life experiences
         b. Listening important
B. Cultural and spiritual needs of the dying

    1. Beliefs are communicated and respected
    2. Rites and rituals are encouraged
    3. Respect for solitude vs. companionship are explored and

         respected
    4. Beliefs and wishes regarding autopsy, funeral and post-

         mortem care discussed and respected
C. Approaches

    1. Respect for religious/cultural practices
    2. Provide physical, emotional and spiritual comfort to

         patient/resident and family
    3. Accept patient's/resident's emotions
    4. Report to licensed nurse any emotional, social, or spiritual

         needs

Objective 4                                                              A. Lecture/Discussion        A. Written Test
List the rights of the dying patient/resident.                           B. Handout 13.4 Dying        B. Class participation
                                                                                                      C. Respects and supports
A. I have the right to be treated as a living human being until I die        Person's Bill of Rights
                                                                                                          the dying
B. I have the right to maintain a sense of hopefulness, however                                           patient's/resident's
    changing its focus may be                                                                             rights

C. I have the right to be cared for by those who can maintain a
    sense of hopefulness, however changing this may be

D. I have the right to express my feelings and emotions about my

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 4 of 17
    approaching death in my own way                                                       Module 16: Death and Dying

E. I have the right to participate in decisions concerning my care                      A. Written test
                                                                                        B. Class participation
F. I have the right to expect continuing medical care and nursing
    attention even though "cure" goals must be changed to "comfort"
    goals

G. I have the right to not die alone

H. I have the right to be free from pain

I. I have the right to have my questions answered honestly

J. I have the right not be deceived

K. I have the right to have help from and for my family in accepting
    my death

L. I have the right to die in peace and dignity

M. I have the right to retain my individuality and not be judged for my
    decisions which may be contrary to beliefs of others

N. I have the right to discuss and enlarge my religious and/or
    spiritual experiences, whatever these may mean to others

O. I have the right to expect that the sanctity of the human body will
    be respected after death

P. I have the right to be cared for by caring, sensitive,
    knowledgeable people who will attempt to understand my needs
    and will be able to gain some satisfaction in helping me face my
    death

Objective 5                                                              A. Lecture
Differentiate between common signs of approaching death and              B. Discussion

biological death.

A. Impending signs of death
    1. Decreasing level of consciousness
    2. Cold hands and feet
    3. Diaphoresis
    4. Pale skin
    5. Loss of muscle tone
    6. Labored or Cheyne-Stokes respirations

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 5 of 17
7. "Death rattle"                                                                                   Module 16: Death and Dying

8. Weak, irregular, or slow pulse                                                                 A. Written test
9. Blank, staring expression                                                                      B. Provides appropriate
10. Jaw drops
11. Mottling of skin                                                                                  care/comfort measure
                                                                                                      for terminally ill
12. Peristalsis slows                                                                                 patient/resident
13. Loss of sensation

    14. Pain decreases
B. Signs of biological death

    1. No pulse
    2. No breathing

    3. No blood pressure
    4. Pupils maybe fixed and dilated
C. Hearing is the last sense to disappear

1. Be professional in all conversation
2. Talk to patient/resident normally

3. Explain procedures

Objective 6                                                          A. Lecture
Identify care and comfort measures for the dying patient/resident.   B. Discussion
A. Monitor patient/resident, observe for signs, change of status     C. Case studies or

    1. Notify licensed nurse in charge for any changes in condition      scenarios on terminally
    2. Determine patient's/resident's code status (DNR, no               ill clients

         code, etc.) in order to act at appropriate level of care
    3. Patient/resident can usually hear, even when they

         appear unconscious
B. Care and comfort measures

    1. Pain management
    2. Hygiene
    3. Oral hygiene
    4. Communication/support
    5. Positioning/turning
    6. Provide comfort
    7. Attend to psychosocial needs
    8. Spiritual support

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 6 of 17
Objective 7                                                            A. Lecture       Module 16: Death and Dying
Identify the philosophy and goals of hospice and the Nurse             B. Discussion
                                                                                      A. Written test
Assistant's role when the patient/resident is cared for by a                          B. Class participation

licensed hospice nurse.

A. History Ł The first modern hospice, St. Christopher's Hospice
    began in London in the 1960s

B. Philosophy

    1. To provide comfort, support and dignity to the dying
         patient/resident using a holistic approach

    2. To provide comfort and support to family and friends of the
         dying person

    3. Hospice care does not prolong life nor does it hasten death

    4. Nurse on call to answer questions, provide support, make a
         visit, or problem solve

C. Goals

    1. To provide palliative care using a team approach with an
         emphasis on pain control and comfort, rather than recovery

     2. Usually for patients with six months or less to live

     3. Patient/resident encouraged to participate in family life and
         decision- making

     4. Services and counseling available to family even after
         person's death

D. Nurse Assistant's role Ł To provide care within scope of practice
     as identified by the multidisciplinary team

E. Attitudes and skills useful in hospice care

     1. Listening

     2. Respecting privacy

     3. Sensitivity to individual needs

     4. Awareness of your own feelings

     5. Recognizing stress

    6. Care for yourself

F. Role of the hospice nurse Ł To meet the physical, emotional and
    spiritual needs of terminally ill patient and his/her family

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 7 of 17
                                                                                            Module 16: Death and Dying

Objective 8                                                      A. Lecture                 A. Written test
Describe procedures and responsibilities for postmortem care.    B. Discussion              B. Class participation
A. Assist with postmortem care as directed by licensed nurse     C. Demonstrate and return
B. Follow facility procedures
C. Provide privacy, support and comfort                              demonstration post-
D. Respect family member's beliefs in regard to postmortem care      mortem care
                                                                 D. Manual Skills 13.8-
                                                                     Postmortem Care

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 8 of 17
                                                                                        Module 16: Death and Dying

Sample Test: Module 16- Death and Dying

1. A patient/resident has terminal breast cancer and says she wants to live three more months to see her first grandchild.
    According to Kubler-Ross, in what stage of the grief process is this patient/resident?
    A. Denial
    B. Bargaining
    C. Depression
    D. Acceptance

2. A patient/resident is dying of a lung disease. He has been recently yelling at the staff. What stage of the grief process may this be?
    A. Anger
    B. Acceptance
    C. Depression
    D. Denial

3. The dying patient/resident has a right to:
    A. Read their facility record at any time they choose
    B. Refuse life-prolonging measures
    C. Refuse to pay for any services
    D. Request the Nurse Assistant to give him medications

4. Mr. Huang is terminally ill and has lost consciousness. The Nurse Assistant should:
    A. Tell his family that death is only a few hours away
    B. Turn and reposition him less frequently
    C. Keep the room very bright and noisy
    D. Remember that the patient/resident may still be able to hear

5. One of the signs of biological death would include:
    A. Bradycardia (slow heart beat)
    B. Hypertension (high blood pressure)
    C. Lack of respirations (patient/resident is not breathing)
    D. Agitation (patient/resident is active and jumpy)

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 9 of 17
                                                                                                                                           Module 16: Death and Dying

6. Mrs. O'Leary always keeps her rosary and medals with her at all times. These objects should be:
    A. Ignored since it is better to avoid discussion about religion
    B. Placed on bedside table where she can't get to it
    C. Removed as soon as she goes to sleep so they are not lost
    D. Left with Mrs. O'Leary and handled as valuable items

7. One of the goals of hospice care is to:
    A. Help the patient/resident in making the dying process less painful physically and psychologically
    B. Prolong life above all else
    C. Provide an elimination of all disease symptoms and pain
    D. Provide an opportunity for death by giving too many drugs

8. Keeping the terminally ill patients/residents comfortable includes:
    A. Keeping the bed in a flat position
    B. Providing skin care and linen changes
    C. Discouraging any visitors
    D. Only turning the patient/resident every 6 hours

9. It is important for the Nurse Assistant to monitor the condition of the dying patient/resident, who has written an Advanced
    Directive not to resuscitate him, so that they can:
    A. Provide physical and emotional support
    B. Provide large serving of food frequently
    C. Notify the physician of the exact time of death
    D. Give medication

10. Usually the first task after the patient/resident has died and before the family comes to visit is to:
    A. Wrap the body in a shroud for transfer to a mortuary
    B. Notify the mortuary for immediate transfer of the body
    C. Just leave the patient/resident as is
    D. Prepare the body for viewing by family members

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 10 of 17
                                                                                           Module 16: Death and Dying

11. Postmortem care includes:
    A. Taping the eyes shut
    B. Bathing as necessary
    C. Removing dentures
    D. Removing prostheses

12. After a patient's/resident's death, the Nurse Assistant should support the family by:
    A. Trying to cheer them
    B. Encouraging the family to talk with the roommate
    C. Listening when the family wants to talk
    D. Assuring the family that the patient/resident is better off

13. When preparing a body for postmortem transfer, the Nurse Assistant should first:
    A. Cover the patient's/resident's body and head with a clean sheet
    B. Straighten the body in supine position
    C. Maintain the patient's/resident's body positions and elevate the head
    D. Provide bright lighting when the family members arrive

14. As part of the care of a patient/resident after death, the Nurse Assistant should:
    A. Dress the patient/resident in regular clothes
    B. Remove all patient's/resident's identification bands
    C. Remove all tubes and drains
    D. Position the patient's/resident's body in normal alignment

15. When caring for a dying patient/resident, the Nurse Assistant should expect:
    A. The patient/resident to be alert
    B. Vital signs to be normal
    C. Breathing to be irregular
    D. Temperature to be unchanged

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 11 of 17
                                                                                  Module 16: Death and Dying

16. To provide emotional support for the family members of a dying patient/resident, the Nurse Assistant should:
    A. Tell them not to cry
    B. Remind them that everyone dies
    C. Accept their expression of feelings
    D. Recommend that they limit their visits

17. Nurse Assistants who help with postmortem care of a patient/resident should:
    A. Wipe the body with alcohol to remove germs
    B. Be sure the body and clothing are clean and dry
    C. Be sure all jewelry is placed on the body
    D. Notify the nurse if there has been a bowel movement

18. The daughter of a patient/resident who has just died says to the Nurse Assistant, "My father can't be dead. It just isn't possible."
    Which of the following would be the best response for the Nurse Assistant to make?
    A. "Didn't you know that your father was very sick?"
    B. "Would you like me to call the mortuary for you?"
    C. "This must be very hard for you"
    D. "I will talk to the nurse in charge"

19. While the Nurse Assistant is changing a patient's/resident's bed, the patient/resident just starts crying and says, "No one cares
    about me. I wish I could just die!" the Nurse Assistant should:
    A. Say nothing and continue to change the bed
    B. Tell the patient/resident that she is too busy to listen
    C. Ask if the patient/resident would like to talk for awhile
    D. Tell the patient/resident to stop being such a baby

20. A dying patient/resident tells the Nurse Assistant, "I'm having a lot of pain." The Nurse Assistant should:   Page 12 of 17
     A. Try to change the subject
     B. Report the pain to the nurse in charge
     C. Talk to the family member about the pain
     D. Leave the room to provide privacy

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018
                                       Module 16: Death and Dying

Sample Test Answers: Module 16  11. B
                                12. C
1. B                            13. B
2. A                            14. D
3. B                            15. C
4. D                            16. C
5. C                            17. B
6. D                            18. C
7. A                            19. C
8. B                            20. B
9. A
10. D

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 13 of 17
Module 16: Death and Dying                                     Manual Skills 16.8: Postmortem Care
EQUIPMENT:
                            MANUAL SKILL: Postmortem Care

Bath Towels
Bed Protector
Disposable gloves
Large container for personal belongings
Postmortem Kit (shroud, gown, or clean hospital gown, 2 tags)
Top Sheet
Valuable List
Wash Basin
Washcloth

BEGINNING STEPS:

1. Wash hands.
2. Knock and pause before entering the patient's/resident's room.
3. Identify patient/resident.
4. Explain procedure speaking clearly, slowly, and directly, maintaining face-to-face contact whenever possible
5. Gather equipment, if applicable.
6. Provide for privacy with a curtain, door, or screen
7. Apply gloves (standard precautions)

SKILL STEPS:

1. Raise bed to comfortable working height.
2. Place body on the back, with head and shoulders elevated on a pillow.
3. Close eyes by gently grasping eyelashes and pulling eyelids over eyes.
4. Place clean dentures in mouth (if applicable). Also, replace artificial eye(s) (if applicable).
5. Close mouth. Note: A rolled hand towel may be placed under the chin to keep jaw closed.
6. Remove soiled dressings; apply clean dressings as indicated, remove tubes or catheters according to policy.
7. Bathe soiled areas with plain water, comb hair, and straighten arms and legs.
8. Place a disposable bed protector underneath the buttocks.

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018       Page 14 of 17
Module 16: Death and Dying                                                         Manual Skills 16.8: Postmortem Care

9. Remove and discard gloves and wash hands.
10. If the family is to view the body:

      A. Put a clean hospital gown on the patient.
      B. Cover the body to the shoulders with a clean sheet.
      C. Make the room look neat and tidy.
      D. Remove soiled linens from the room.
      E. Adjust the light to subdued level and allow the family to visit privately.
11. Put the shroud on the patient/resident after the family leaves (if applicable). Note: May be done by the funeral home when they
    pick up the body.
12. Collect all belongings and make a list, store, and label or give to family.
13. Fill out identification cards and fasten to foot of patient/resident and one on each of the patient's/resident's belongings.
14. Follow facility policy if necessary to bring body to morgue.
15. Remove all linens and other supplies from room.
16. Report and record:
      A. Completion of procedure and time.
      B. Where the body was transported and by whom.
      C.What was done with the personal belongings.

ENDING STEPS:

1. Clean and return equipment and supplies, if applicable.
2. Remove gloves (without contaminating self) into waste container and wash hands
3. Position patient/resident comfortably.
4. Place call light within reach.
5. Lower bed to safe position for the patient/resident.
6. Leave room neat.
7. Wash hands.
8. Document.
9. Report abnormal findings to licensed nurse.

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 15 of 17
Module 16: Death and Dying                                                              Handout 16.2: Timeline of Life

                                                    Timeline of Life

1. Write the timeline on the board as follows:

  l                                                                                                                      _l
Birth                                                                                                                  Death

2. Have the student make a similar timeline on a piece of paper and place a mark on the timeline that indicates approximately where
    they feel they are in their life.

Example:

  l      _l        l                 l          _l  l             _l _l  l              _l                          l  l
Birth  dance    Christmas         graduation
       recital                                  marriage PRESENT  RN children purchase  travel grandkids Death
                 1988
                                                                         home

3. From "Birth" to where they placed their "present" mark, they should put highlights of their life, memories, accomplishments, etc.
    From "present" mark to "Death", they should put their hopes and dreams for the future, goals, etc.

4. Ask for those students that wish to "share" their life, tell the class what they put down. (Maybe 3-4 students)

5. When the sharing has been completed, ask all students to pass forward their "lives". Take all the lives, and show the class.
    Explain that you have all their memories, their hopes, and dreams for the future, and that they are sitting in a doctor's office, and
    have just been told they have a terminal disease. Place their papers in a trash can.

6. After they have a moment to process what has occurred, ask them how they feel about the news and what you have just done.
    Some students may express anger, disbelief, sadness, etc. Discuss their feelings, and relate it to Dr. Kubler-Ross' stages of
    grieving. Explain that the process of dying is very individual, and just as there are different reactions in class, there will be
    different reactions in the facility.

7. Begin Death and Dying Module.

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018             Page 16 of 17
Module 16- Death and Dying                                                               Handout 16.4- Dying Person's Bill of Rights

                            The Dying Person's Bill of Rights

1. I have the right to be treated as a living human being until I die.
2. I have the right to maintain a sense of hopefulness, however changing its focus may be.
3. I have the right to be cared for by those who can maintain a sense of hopefulness, however changing this might be.
4. I have the right to express my feelings and emotions about my approaching death in my own way.
5. I have the right to participate in decisions concerning my care.
6. I have the right to expect continuing medical and nursing attention even though "cure" goals must be changed to "comfort"

    goals.
7. I have the right to not die alone.
8. I have the right to be free from pain.
9. I have the right to have my questions answered honestly.
10. I have the right to not be deceived.
11. I have the right to have help from and for my family in accepting my death.
12. I have the right to die in peace and dignity.
13. I have the right to retain my individuality and not be judged for my decisions, which may be contrary to the beliefs of others.
14. I have the right to discuss and enlarge my religious and/or spiritual experiences, whatever these may mean to others.
15. I have the right to expect that the sanctity of the human body will be respected after death.
16. I have the right to be cared for by caring, sensitive, knowledgeable people who will attempt to understand my needs and will

    be able to gain some satisfaction in helping me face my death.

California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018  Page 17 of 17
