Module 16: Death and Dying 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 1 of 17 
 
 
Module 16: Death and Dying 
Minimum Number of Theory Hours: 2 
Recommended Clinical Hours: 0 
 
Statement of Purpose: 
The Nurse Assistant is introduced to the various stages of the grieving process and physical signs of approaching death. This unit 
introduces death as a normal stage of life. The health care provider must recognize the physical, psychological, and spiritual needs 
of the patient/resident during this period to understand coping mechanisms and provide support to the patient/resident and family 
members. 
 
Terminology 
1. Acceptance 
2. Advanced directives 
3. Apnea 
4. Anger 
5. Artificial hydration/nutrition 
6. Autopsy 
7. Bargaining 
8. Cachexia 
9. Cheyne-stokes respirations 
10. Denial 
11. Depression 
12. Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) 
13. Durable power of attorney 
 
14. Hospice 
15. Living will 
16. Morgue 
17. Mottling 
18. Palliative care 
19. Patient Care Self-Determination Act 
20. Postmortem care 
21. Prognosis 
22. Reminiscence 
23. Reincarnation 
24. Rigor mortis 
25. Shroud 
26. Terminal 
 
 
 
Patient, resident, and client are synonymous terms referring to the person receiving care 
 
 
 
 
 

Module 16: Death and Dying 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 2 of 17 
 
 
Performance Standards (Objectives): 
Upon completion of the two hours of class plus homework assignments, the learner will be able to: 
1. Define key terminology 
2. Describe the five stages of the grieving process according to Dr. Kubler-Ross 
3. Describe approaches to meet common emotional and spiritual needs of terminally ill patients/residents and their families 
4. List the rights of the dying patient/resident 
5. Differentiate between common signs of approaching death and biological death 
6. Identify care and comfort measures for dying patients/residents 
7. Identify the philosophy and goals of hospice and the Nurse Assistant’s role when the patient/resident is cared for by a licensed 
hospice nurse 
8. Describe procedures and responsibilities for postmortem care 

Module 16: Death and Dying 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 3 of 17 
 
 
References: 
1. Acello, B. & Hegner, B. (2016). Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage Learning. 
2. Acello, B. (2016). Workbook to accompany: Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage 
Learning 
3. Carter, P. J. (2017). Lippincott Essentials for Nursing Assistants: a Humanistic Approach to Caregiving. (4th ed.) Philadelphia, 
PA. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 
4. Deck, M. L. (2004). Instant Teaching Tools for the New Millennium. St Louis, MO. Mosby 
5. Hedman, S. A., Fuzy, J., & Rymer, S. (2018). Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque, NM. 
Hartman Publishing, Inc. 
6. Hartman Publishing. (2018). Workbook for Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque, NM. 
Hartman Publishing, Inc. 
7. Haroun, L. & Royce, S. (2004). Teaching Ideas and Activities for Health Care. Albany, NY. Delmar Publishers 
8. Pearson Vue (2018) California Nurse Assistant Candidate Handbook for National Nurse Aide Assessment Program. Philadelphia, 
PA. Pearson Education, Inc. 
9. Sorrentino, S. A., Remmert, L., & and Kelly, R. (2018) Workbook and Competency Evaluation Review for Moby’s Textbook for 
Nursing Assistants (9th ed.) St. Louis, MO. Mosby Company 
10. Sorrentino, S.A. and Remmert, L. (2018) Mosby’s Textbook for Nursing Assistants. (9th ed.). St Louis, MO. Elsevier 
11. Weaver, L. & Wilding, M. (2013) The Dimensions of Engaged Teaching: a Practical Guide for Educators. Bloomington, IN. 
Solution Tree Press. 

Module 16: Death and Dying 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 3 of 17 
 
 
 
 
Content Outline 
Recommended Teaching 
Strategies and 
Assignments 
Clinical Demonstration/ 
Method of Evaluation 
Objective 1 
Define key terminology. 
A. Review the terms listed in the terminology section 
B. Spell the listed terms accurately 
C. Pronounce the terms correctly 
D. Use the terms in their proper context 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Games: word searches, 
crossword puzzles, 
Family Feud, Jeopardy, 
bingo, spelling bee, 
hangman, and 
concentration 
C. Encourage use of 
internet, medical 
dictionary, and 
textbooks 
D. Create flashcards for 
learning purposes 
 
 
A. Have students select 
five words from the list 
of key terminology and 
write a sentence for 
each defining the term 
B. Administer vocabulary 
pre-test and post-test 
C. Uses appropriate 
terminology when 
charting and reporting to 
licensed personnel 
Objective 2 
Describe the five stages of grieving according to Dr. Kubler- 
Ross. 
A. Denial 
B. Anger 
C. Bargaining 
D. Depression 
E. Acceptance 
 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Handout 13.2 Timeline 
of Life 
C. “The Death Exercise” in 
Instant Teaching Tools 
for the New Millennium 
by Michele Deck 
 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Class participation 
Objective 3 
Describe approaches to meet common emotional and spiritual 
needs of terminally ill patients/residents and their families. 
A. Emotional needs of the dying 
1. Contact with loved ones 
 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Role play providing 
support to family of 
 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Displays supportive 
behaviors when caring 
 
 
 

Module 16: Death and Dying 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 4 of 17 
 
 
 
a. Encourage family members to visit 
b. Provide privacy 
2. Communication: 
a. Listening 
b. Touching 
3. Expression of emotions, i.e. guilt, anger, frustration, anxiety, 
depression 
4. Reminiscence 
a. Recalling life experiences 
b. Listening important 
B. Cultural and spiritual needs of the dying 
1. Beliefs are communicated and respected 
2. Rites and rituals are encouraged 
3. Respect for solitude vs. companionship are explored and 
respected 
4. Beliefs and wishes regarding autopsy, funeral and post- 
mortem care discussed and respected 
C. Approaches 
1. Respect for religious/cultural practices 
2. Provide physical, emotional and spiritual comfort to 
patient/resident and family 
3. Accept patient’s/resident’s emotions 
4. Report to licensed nurse any emotional, social, or spiritual 
needs 
dying patient/resident. 
Practice what to say. 
This is a difficult skill. 
Students can give 
suggestions for what 
words are most 
comforting/supportive 
for terminally ill 
patients/residents and 
families 
Objective 4 
List the rights of the dying patient/resident. 
A. I have the right to be treated as a living human being until I die 
B. I have the right to maintain a sense of hopefulness, however 
changing its focus may be 
C. I have the right to be cared for by those who can maintain a 
sense of hopefulness, however changing this may be 
D. I have the right to express my feelings and emotions about my 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Handout 13.4 Dying 
Person’s Bill of Rights 
 
 
A. Written Test 
B. Class participation 
C. Respects and supports 
the dying 
patient’s/resident’s 
rights 
 

Module 16: Death and Dying 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 5 of 17 
 
 
 
approaching death in my own way 
E. I have the right to participate in decisions concerning my care 
F. I have the right to expect continuing medical care and nursing 
attention even though “cure” goals must be changed to “comfort” 
goals 
G. I have the right to not die alone 
H. I have the right to be free from pain 
I. I have the right to have my questions answered honestly 
J. I have the right not be deceived 
K. I have the right to have help from and for my family in accepting 
my death 
L. I have the right to die in peace and dignity 
M. I have the right to retain my individuality and not be judged for my 
decisions which may be contrary to beliefs of others 
N. I have the right to discuss and enlarge my religious and/or 
spiritual experiences, whatever these may mean to others 
O. I have the right to expect that the sanctity of the human body will 
be respected after death 
P. I have the right to be cared for by caring, sensitive, 
knowledgeable people who will attempt to understand my needs 
and will be able to gain some satisfaction in helping me face my 
death 
 
Objective 5 
Differentiate between common signs of approaching death and 
biological death. 
A. Impending signs of death 
1. Decreasing level of consciousness 
2. Cold hands and feet 
3. Diaphoresis 
4. Pale skin 
5. Loss of muscle tone 
6. Labored or Cheyne-Stokes respirations 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Class participation 
 

Module 16: Death and Dying 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 6 of 17 
 
 
 
7. “Death rattle” 
8. Weak, irregular, or slow pulse 
9. Blank, staring expression 
10. Jaw drops 
11. Mottling of skin 
12. Peristalsis slows 
13. Loss of sensation 
14. Pain decreases 
B. Signs of biological death 
1. No pulse 
2. No breathing 
3. No blood pressure 
4. Pupils maybe fixed and dilated 
C. Hearing is the last sense to disappear 
1. Be professional in all conversation 
2. Talk to patient/resident normally 
3. Explain procedures 
 
Objective 6 
Identify care and comfort measures for the dying patient/resident. 
A. Monitor patient/resident, observe for signs, change of status 
1. Notify licensed nurse in charge for any changes in condition 
2. Determine patient’s/resident’s code status (DNR, no 
code, etc.) in order to act at appropriate level of care 
3. Patient/resident can usually hear, even when they 
appear unconscious 
B. Care and comfort measures 
1. Pain management 
2. Hygiene 
3. Oral hygiene 
4. Communication/support 
5. Positioning/turning 
6. Provide comfort 
7. Attend to psychosocial needs 
8. Spiritual support 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
C. Case studies or 
scenarios on terminally 
ill clients 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Provides appropriate 
care/comfort measure 
for terminally ill 
patient/resident 
 

Module 16: Death and Dying 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 7 of 17 
 
 
 
Objective 7 
Identify the philosophy and goals of hospice and the Nurse 
Assistant’s role when the patient/resident is cared for by a 
licensed hospice nurse. 
A. History – The first modern hospice, St. Christopher’s Hospice 
began in London in the 1960s 
B. Philosophy 
1. To provide comfort, support and dignity to the dying 
patient/resident using a holistic approach 
2. To provide comfort and support to family and friends of the 
dying person 
3. Hospice care does not prolong life nor does it hasten death 
4. Nurse on call to answer questions, provide support, make a 
visit, or problem solve 
C. Goals 
1. To provide palliative care using a team approach with an 
emphasis on pain control and comfort, rather than recovery 
2. Usually for patients with six months or less to live 
3. Patient/resident encouraged to participate in family life and 
decision- making 
4. Services and counseling available to family even after 
person’s death 
D. Nurse Assistant’s role – To provide care within scope of practice 
as identified by the multidisciplinary team 
E. Attitudes and skills useful in hospice care 
1. Listening 
2. Respecting privacy 
3. Sensitivity to individual needs 
4. Awareness of your own feelings 
5. Recognizing stress 
6. Care for yourself 
F. Role of the hospice nurse – To meet the physical, emotional and 
spiritual needs of terminally ill patient and his/her family 
 
 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
 
 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Class participation 
 
 

Module 16: Death and Dying 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 8 of 17 
 
 
 
Objective 8 
Describe procedures and responsibilities for postmortem care. 
A. Assist with postmortem care as directed by licensed nurse 
B. Follow facility procedures 
C. Provide privacy, support and comfort 
D. Respect family member’s beliefs in regard to postmortem care 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
C. Demonstrate and return 
demonstration post- 
mortem care 
D. Manual Skills 13.8- 
Postmortem Care 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Class participation 

Module 16: Death and Dying 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 9 of 17 
 
 
 
Sample Test: Module 16- Death and Dying 
 
1. A patient/resident has terminal breast cancer and says she wants to live three more months to see her first grandchild. 
According to Kubler-Ross, in what stage of the grief process is this patient/resident? 
A. Denial 
B. Bargaining 
C. Depression 
D. Acceptance 
 
2. A patient/resident is dying of a lung disease. He has been recently yelling at the staff. What stage of the grief process may this be? 
A. Anger 
B. Acceptance 
C. Depression 
D. Denial 
 
3. The dying patient/resident has a right to: 
A. Read their facility record at any time they choose 
B. Refuse life-prolonging measures 
C. Refuse to pay for any services 
D. Request the Nurse Assistant to give him medications 
 
4. Mr. Huang is terminally ill and has lost consciousness. The Nurse Assistant should: 
A. Tell his family that death is only a few hours away 
B. Turn and reposition him less frequently 
C. Keep the room very bright and noisy 
D. Remember that the patient/resident may still be able to hear 
 
5. One of the signs of biological death would include: 
A. Bradycardia (slow heart beat) 
B. Hypertension (high blood pressure) 
C. Lack of respirations (patient/resident is not breathing) 
D. Agitation (patient/resident is active and jumpy) 

Module 16: Death and Dying 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 10 of 17 
 
 
 
 
6. Mrs. O’Leary always keeps her rosary and medals with her at all times. These objects should be: 
A. Ignored since it is better to avoid discussion about religion 
B. Placed on bedside table where she can’t get to it 
C. Removed as soon as she goes to sleep so they are not lost 
D. Left with Mrs. O’Leary and handled as valuable items 
 
7. One of the goals of hospice care is to: 
A. Help the patient/resident in making the dying process less painful physically and psychologically 
B. Prolong life above all else 
C. Provide an elimination of all disease symptoms and pain 
D. Provide an opportunity for death by giving too many drugs 
 
8. Keeping the terminally ill patients/residents comfortable includes: 
A. Keeping the bed in a flat position 
B. Providing skin care and linen changes 
C. Discouraging any visitors 
D. Only turning the patient/resident every 6 hours 
 
9. It is important for the Nurse Assistant to monitor the condition of the dying patient/resident, who has written an Advanced 
Directive not to resuscitate him, so that they can: 
A. Provide physical and emotional support 
B. Provide large serving of food frequently 
C. Notify the physician of the exact time of death 
D. Give medication 
 
10. Usually the first task after the patient/resident has died and before the family comes to visit is to: 
A. Wrap the body in a shroud for transfer to a mortuary 
B. Notify the mortuary for immediate transfer of the body 
C. Just leave the patient/resident as is 
D. Prepare the body for viewing by family members

Module 16: Death and Dying 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 11 of 17 
 
 
 
11. Postmortem care includes: 
A. Taping the eyes shut 
B. Bathing as necessary 
C. Removing dentures 
D. Removing prostheses 
 
12. After a patient’s/resident’s death, the Nurse Assistant should support the family by: 
A. Trying to cheer them 
B. Encouraging the family to talk with the roommate 
C. Listening when the family wants to talk 
D. Assuring the family that the patient/resident is better off 
 
13. When preparing a body for postmortem transfer, the Nurse Assistant should first: 
A. Cover the patient’s/resident’s body and head with a clean sheet 
B. Straighten the body in supine position 
C. Maintain the patient’s/resident’s body positions and elevate the head 
D. Provide bright lighting when the family members arrive 
 
14. As part of the care of a patient/resident after death, the Nurse Assistant should: 
A. Dress the patient/resident in regular clothes 
B. Remove all patient’s/resident’s identification bands 
C. Remove all tubes and drains 
D. Position the patient’s/resident’s body in normal alignment 
 
15. When caring for a dying patient/resident, the Nurse Assistant should expect: 
A. The patient/resident to be alert 
B. Vital signs to be normal 
C. Breathing to be irregular 
D. Temperature to be unchanged 

Module 16: Death and Dying 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 12 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
16. To provide emotional support for the family members of a dying patient/resident, the Nurse Assistant should: 
A. Tell them not to cry 
B. Remind them that everyone dies 
C. Accept their expression of feelings 
D. Recommend that they limit their visits 
 
17. Nurse Assistants who help with postmortem care of a patient/resident should: 
A. Wipe the body with alcohol to remove germs 
B. Be sure the body and clothing are clean and dry 
C. Be sure all jewelry is placed on the body 
D. Notify the nurse if there has been a bowel movement 
 
18. The daughter of a patient/resident who has just died says to the Nurse Assistant, “My father can’t be dead. It just isn’t possible.” 
Which of the following would be the best response for the Nurse Assistant to make? 
A. “Didn’t you know that your father was very sick?” 
B. “Would you like me to call the mortuary for you?” 
C. “This must be very hard for you” 
D. “I will talk to the nurse in charge” 
 
19. While the Nurse Assistant is changing a patient’s/resident’s bed, the patient/resident just starts crying and says, “No one cares 
about me. I wish I could just die!” the Nurse Assistant should: 
A. Say nothing and continue to change the bed 
B. Tell the patient/resident that she is too busy to listen 
C. Ask if the patient/resident would like to talk for awhile 
D. Tell the patient/resident to stop being such a baby 
 
20. A dying patient/resident tells the Nurse Assistant, “I’m having a lot of pain.” The Nurse Assistant should: 
A. Try to change the subject 
B. Report the pain to the nurse in charge 
C. Talk to the family member about the pain 
D. Leave the room to provide privacy 

Module 16: Death and Dying 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 13 of 17 
 
 
 
Sample Test Answers: Module 16 
 
1. B 
2. A 
3. B 
4. D 
5. C 
6. D 
7. A 
8. B 
9. A 
10. D 
11. B 
12. C 
13. B 
14. D 
15. C 
16. C 
17. B 
18. C 
19. C 
20. B 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 14 of 17 
Module 16: Death and Dying Manual Skills 16.8: Postmortem Care 
 
 
 
MANUAL SKILL: Postmortem Care 
 
EQUIPMENT: 
 
Bath Towels 
Bed Protector 
Disposable gloves 
Large container for personal belongings 
Postmortem Kit (shroud, gown, or clean hospital gown, 2 tags) 
Top Sheet 
Valuable List 
Wash Basin 
Washcloth 
 
BEGINNING STEPS: 
 
1. Wash hands. 
2. Knock and pause before entering the patient’s/resident’s room. 
3. Identify patient/resident. 
4. Explain procedure speaking clearly, slowly, and directly, maintaining face-to-face contact whenever possible 
5. Gather equipment, if applicable. 
6. Provide for privacy with a curtain, door, or screen 
7. Apply gloves (standard precautions) 
 
SKILL STEPS: 
 
1. Raise bed to comfortable working height. 
2. Place body on the back, with head and shoulders elevated on a pillow. 
3. Close eyes by gently grasping eyelashes and pulling eyelids over eyes. 
4. Place clean dentures in mouth (if applicable). Also, replace artificial eye(s) (if applicable). 
5. Close mouth. Note: A rolled hand towel may be placed under the chin to keep jaw closed. 
6. Remove soiled dressings; apply clean dressings as indicated, remove tubes or catheters according to policy. 
7. Bathe soiled areas with plain water, comb hair, and straighten arms and legs. 
8. Place a disposable bed protector underneath the buttocks. 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 15 of 17 
Module 16: Death and Dying Manual Skills 16.8: Postmortem Care 
 
 
 
 
9. Remove and discard gloves and wash hands. 
10. If the family is to view the body: 
A. Put a clean hospital gown on the patient. 
B. Cover the body to the shoulders with a clean sheet. 
C. Make the room look neat and tidy. 
D. Remove soiled linens from the room. 
E. Adjust the light to subdued level and allow the family to visit privately. 
11. Put the shroud on the patient/resident after the family leaves (if applicable). Note: May be done by the funeral home when they 
pick up the body. 
12. Collect all belongings and make a list, store, and label or give to family. 
13. Fill out identification cards and fasten to foot of patient/resident and one on each of the patient’s/resident’s belongings. 
14. Follow facility policy if necessary to bring body to morgue. 
15. Remove all linens and other supplies from room. 
16. Report and record: 
A. Completion of procedure and time. 
B. Where the body was transported and by whom. 
C. What was done with the personal belongings. 
 
 
ENDING STEPS: 
 
1. Clean and return equipment and supplies, if applicable. 
2. Remove gloves (without contaminating self) into waste container and wash hands 
3. Position patient/resident comfortably. 
4. Place call light within reach. 
5. Lower bed to safe position for the patient/resident. 
6. Leave room neat. 
7. Wash hands. 
8. Document. 
9. Report abnormal findings to licensed nurse. 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 16 of 17 
Module 16: Death and Dying Handout 16.2: Timeline of Life 
 
 
Timeline of Life 
 
1. Write the timeline on the board as follows: 
 
 l _l 
Birth Death 
 
2. Have the student make a similar timeline on a piece of paper and place a mark on the timeline that indicates approximately where 
they feel they are in their life. 
 
Example: 
 
 l _l l l _l l _l _l l _l l l 
 
Birth dance Christmas graduation marriage PRESENT RN children purchase travel grandkids Death 
 recital 1988 home 
 
3. From “Birth” to where they placed their “present” mark, they should put highlights of their life, memories, accomplishments, etc. 
From “present” mark to “Death”, they should put their hopes and dreams for the future, goals, etc. 
 
4. Ask for those students that wish to “share” their life, tell the class what they put down. (Maybe 3-4 students) 
 
5. When the sharing has been completed, ask all students to pass forward their “lives”. Take all the lives, and show the class. 
Explain that you have all their memories, their hopes, and dreams for the future, and that they are sitting in a doctor’s office, and 
have just been told they have a terminal disease. Place their papers in a trash can. 
 
6. After they have a moment to process what has occurred, ask them how they feel about the news and what you have just done. 
Some students may express anger, disbelief, sadness, etc. Discuss their feelings, and relate it to Dr. Kubler-Ross’ stages of 
grieving. Explain that the process of dying is very individual, and just as there are different reactions in class, there will be 
different reactions in the facility. 
 
7. Begin Death and Dying Module. 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 17 of 17 
Module 16- Death and Dying Handout 16.4- Dying Person’s Bill of Rights 
 
 
The Dying Person’s Bill o f Rights 
 
1. I have the right to be treated as a living human being until I die. 
2. I have the right to maintain a sense of hopefulness, however changing its focus may be. 
3. I have the right to be cared for by those who can maintain a sense of hopefulness, however changing this might be. 
4. I have the right to express my feelings and emotions about my approaching death in my own way. 
5. I have the right to participate in decisions concerning my care. 
6. I have the right to expect continuing medical and nursing attention even though “cure” goals must be changed to “comfort” 
goals. 
7. I have the right to not die alone. 
8. I have the right to be free from pain. 
9. I have the right to have my questions answered honestly. 
10. I have the right to not be deceived. 
11. I have the right to have help from and for my family in accepting my death. 
12. I have the right to die in peace and dignity. 
13. I have the right to retain my individuality and not be judged for my decisions, which may be contrary to the beliefs of others. 
14. I have the right to discuss and enlarge my religious and/or spiritual experiences, whatever these may mean to others. 
15. I have the right to expect that the sanctity of the human body will be respected after death. 
16. I have the right to be cared for by caring, sensitive, knowledgeable people who will attempt to understand my needs and will 
be able to gain some satisfaction in helping me face my death.