Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 1 of 24 
 
 
Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
Minimum Number of Theory Hours: 2 
Recommended Clinical Hours: 1 
 
Statement of Purpose: 
The purpose of this unit is to introduce the student to the concepts and procedures related to emergency procedures, signs and 
symptoms of distress, and the role of the Nurse Assistant in Long Term Care (LTC) in the response to immediate and temporary 
intervention in emergency situations. 
 
Terminology: 
1. Abdominal thrusts 
2. Advance directive 
3. Agitation 
4. Airway 
5. Aphasia 
6. Aspirate 
7. Automated External Device (AED) 
8. Barrier device 
9. Bradypnea 
10. Breathing 
11. Cardiac arrest 
12. Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) 
13. Compressions, Airway, Breathing (CAB)-formerly (ABC) 
14. Cyanosis 
15. Defibrillator 
16. Diaphoresis 
17. Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) 
18. Dyspnea 
 
19. Emergency Medical Services (EMS) 
20. Heimlich maneuver 
21. Hemiplegia 
22. Hemorrhage 
23. Hyperventilation 
24. Hypoglycemia 
25. Hypoventilation 
26. Hypoxia 
27. Pallor 
28. Pocket mask 
29. Recovery position 
30. Respiratory arrest 
31. Respiratory distress 
32. Stat 
33. Syncope 
34. Tachypnea 
35. Unconscious 
 
 
 
Patient, resident, and client are synonymous terms referring to the person receiving care

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 2 of 24 
 
 
Performance Standards (Objectives): 
1. Define key terminology. 
2. Identify common signs and symptoms of conditions associated with patient/resident distress and describe the Nurse Assistant’s 
role and responsibility in preventing and/or responding. 
3. Describe the immediate interventions in a medical emergency. 
4. List the causes and signs of choking and discuss the use of abdominal thrusts for relief of obstructed airway. 
5. Describe common emergency codes used in long-term care facilities. 
 
This module may be taught concurrently with Module 4: Safe Environment 
 
References: 
1. Acello, B. & Hegner, B. (2016). Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage Learning. 
2. Acello, B. (2016). Workbook to accompany: Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage 
Learning 
3. Carter, P. J. (2017). Lippincott Essentials for Nursing Assistants: a Humanistic Approach to Caregiving. (4th ed.) Philadelphia, PA. 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 
4. Deck, M. L. (2004). Instant Teaching Tools for the New Millennium. St Louis, MO. Mosby 
5. Hedman, S. A., Fuzy, J., & Rymer, S. (2018). Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque, NM. 
Hartman Publishing, Inc. 
6. Hartman Publishing. (2018). Workbook for Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque, NM. 
Hartman Publishing, Inc. 
7. Haroun, L. & Royce, S. (2004). Teaching Ideas and Activities for Health Care. Albany, NY. Delmar Publishers 
8. Pearson Vue (2018) California Nurse Assistant Candidate Handbook for National Nurse Aide Assessment Program. Philadelphia, 
PA. Pearson Education, Inc. 
9. Sorrentino, S. A., Remmert, L., & and Kelly, R. (2018) Workbook and Competency Evaluation Review for Moby’s Textbook for 
Nursing Assistants (9th ed.) St. Louis, MO. Mosby Company 
10. Sorrentino, S.A. and Remmert, L. (2018) Mosby’s Textbook for Nursing Assistants. (9th ed.). St Louis, MO. Elsevier 
11. Weaver, L. & Wilding, M. (2013) The Dimensions of Engaged Teaching: a Practical Guide for Educators. Bloomington, IN. 
Solution Tree Press.

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 3 of 24 
 
 
 
 
Content Outline 
Recommended Teaching 
Strategies and 
Assignments 
Clinical Demonstration/ 
Method of Evaluation 
Objective 1 
Define Key Terminology. 
A. Review the terms listed in the terminology section 
B. Spell the listed terms accurately 
C. Pronounce the terms correctly 
D. Use the terms in their proper context 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Games: word searches, 
crossword puzzles, 
Family Feud, Jeopardy, 
bingo, spelling bee, 
hangman, and 
concentration 
C. Encourage use of 
internet, medical 
dictionary, and 
textbooks 
D. Create flashcards 
E. Handout 12.1a- 
Emergency Procedures 
Crossword 
F. Handout 12.1b- 
Emergency Procedures 
Crossword- KEY 
 
 
A. Have students select 
five words from the list 
of key terminology and 
write a sentence for 
each defining the term 
B. Administer vocabulary 
pre-test and post-test 
C. Uses appropriate 
terminology when 
charting and reporting to 
licensed personnel 
Objective 2 
Identify common signs and symptoms of conditions associated 
with patient/resident distress and describe the Nurse 
Assistant’s role and responsibility in preventing and/or 
responding. 
A. Myocardial infarction (MI, heart attack) 
1. A disruption of the flow of blood to an area of the muscle of 
the heart with subsequent death of the tissue at that area 
2. Signs and symptoms 
a. Chest pain 
1) May be described as crushing, squeezing, or pressure 
2) May radiate down arms, jaw, or back 
 
 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
Show online video (13 
min) “Act in Time to 
Heart Attack Signs” from 
National Heart and Lung 
Institute. (May need to 
download RealPlayer) 
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/ 
actintime/video.htm 
 
 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Recognizes 
patients/residents in 
distress and reports 
signs and symptoms 
immediately to charge 
nurse 
C. Provides appropriate 
 

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 4 of 24 
 
 
 
2) Complaint may be severe indigestion, heartburn, or 
stomach pain 
b. Shortness of breath, Dyspnea or absence of breathing 
c. Diaphoresis 
d. Wet, cold, clammy skin 
e. Confusion, mental status change, anxiety 
f. Syncope, fainting 
g. Weakness, fatigue 
h. Nausea, vomiting 
i. Irregular pulse 
3. Nurse Assistant Role 
a. Call for help loudly and pull the emergency light if 
available 
b. Remain calm 
c. Stay with the patient/resident 
d. Place patient/resident in comfortable position (some 
heart attack victims can breathe easier in a sitting rather 
than lying position) 
e. Reassure the patient/resident 
f. Intervene at level of competence as directed by licensed 
nurse 
g. Assess condition and vital signs while awaiting assistance 
from licensed nurse 
h. Keep the patient/resident warm as needed 
B. Cardiac Arrest 
1. Absence of heart function 
2. Signs and symptoms 
a. No Pulse, no circulation 
b. Loss of consciousness 
c. No effective breathing (may be agonal breathing) 
d. Enlargement of pupils 
e. Gray color to skin, cyanotic nail beds 
D. Go to American Stroke 
Association website for 
stroke information: 
http://www.strokeassoci 
ation.org/STROKEORG/ 
AboutStroke/Lets-Talk- 
About-Stroke-atient- 
Information- 
Sheets_UCM_310731_ 
Article.jsp 
care or emergency 
measures until qualified 
help arrives 
D. Documents according to 
facility policy 
 
 

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 5 of 24 
 
 
 
3. Nurse Assistant Role - See Objective 3 for role in medical 
emergency 
C. Cerebrovascular accident (CVA, Stroke, or brain attack) 
1. A disturbance or obstruction of the flow of blood to a particular 
area of the brain with subsequent death of tissue 
2. Signs and Symptoms 
a. Hemiplegia or weakness of one side of the body or 
numbness or tingling on one side of the body 
b. Aphasia-difficulty in speaking or understanding speech 
c. Headache 
d. Vision changes, blurred vision, pupils unequal 
e. Facial changes 
1) Cheeks may “puff “on exhalation 
2) One eyelid or eye may droop 
3) Face may appear asymmetrical 
4) Drooling 
f. Loss of bowel or bladder control 
g. Shaking or trembling 
3. Give Me 5 for Stroke Tool from American Stroke Association 
a. Walk (Is their balance off?) 
b. Talk (Is their speech slurred or is their face droopy?) 
c. Reach (Is one side weak or numb?) 
d. See (Is their vision all or partly lost) 
e. Feel (Is their headache severe?) 
4. FAST from American Stroke Association 
a. Face drooping 
b. Arm weakness 
c. Speech difficulty 
d. Time to call 9-1-1 
5. Nurse Assistant Role 
a. Call for help loudly and pull emergency call light if available 
b. Remain calm 
 

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 6 of 24 
 
 
 
c. Stay with the patient/resident 
d. Place patient/resident in a position of comfort 
e. Reassure patient/resident 
f. Intervene at level of competence as directed by the 
licensed nurse 
g. Assess patient’s/resident’s condition and take vital 
signs while awaiting assistance from the licensed 
nurse 
h. Keep patient/resident warm as needed 
D. Syncope, fainting episode 
1. A feeling of dizziness with possible temporary loss of 
consciousness 
2. Signs and Symptoms 
a. Dizziness 
b. Visual changes-temporary loss of vision 
c. Pallor or paleness of the skin 
d. Cool, moist skin 
e. Eyes may roll back 
f. Unsteadiness or loss of upright position (patient/resident 
may fall) 
g. Weak pulse 
3. Nursing Assistant Role 
a. Before loss of consciousness and during dizziness 
1) Remain calm, call for help loudly, pull call light 
2) Assist to floor, protect from injury 
3) If sitting, place head towards knees 
4) If lying flat on back, elevate legs slightly if no spinal, 
head or back injuries (If unsure, leave flat on back) 
5) Loosen tight or binding clothing 
6) Observe for any changes in condition 
b. After loss of consciousness 
1) Raise legs approximately 8-12 inches if no spinal, head 
or back injuries (If unsure, leave flat on back) 
 

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 7 of 24 
 
 
 
2) Loosen tight or binding clothing 
3) Observe for any changes in condition and monitor vital 
signs while waiting for help to arrive 
E. Seizures; convulsions or epilepsy 
1. An interference with the normal electrical activity of the brain 
with subsequent changes in mental status 
2. Types of seizures and related Signs and Symptoms 
a. Absence or partial (petit mal) seizure 
1) A mild blackout 
2) Looks as though daydreaming 
b. Generalized tonic-clonic or grand mal seizure 
1) Uncontrolled muscular contractions 
2) Can be minimal to major with possible violent head 
jerking 
3) May be frothing at the mouth 
4) May be loss of bowel and bladder control 
3. Nurse Assistant Role 
a. Assist patient/resident to ground safely 
b. Note time 
c. Cushion head 
d. Remain calm, call for help loudly, and pull emergency call 
light 
e. Stay with patient/resident and observe 
f. If possible, gently turn head to one side to reduce risk of 
choking (This may not be possible in a violent seizure) 
g. Loosen clothing and/or jewelry 
h. Pad any items that may be dangerous to the 
patient/resident or move items away from 
patient/resident (i.e. furniture) 
i. Do NOT attempt to restrain nor put anything into 
patient’s/resident’s mouth 
j. Note time seizure ends 
k. Follow licensed nurse instructions to assist with putting 
patient/resident into recovery position 
 

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 8 of 24 
 
 
 
F. Insulin Shock 
1. Definition 
a. Hypoglycemia 
b. Condition resulting from an overdose of insulin resulting in 
reduction of the blood sugar level below normal 
c. May develop due to an insulin-dependent patient/resident 
skipping meals or snacks, stress, diarrhea and vomiting or 
possible medication reaction 
2. Signs and Symptoms 
a. Pale, moist skin 
b. Rapid bounding pulse 
c. Headache, confusion, weakness 
d. Anxiety, excitement 
e. Hunger 
f. Low blood pressure (hypotension) 
g. Unconsciousness 
3. Nurse Assistant Role 
a. Stay with patient/resident 
b. Remain calm, call for help loudly, and pull emergency call 
light 
c. Administer orange juice, milk, or snack if instructed by 
licensed nurse 
G. Hemorrhaging, severe bleeding 
1. An extreme or unexpected loss of blood 
2. Signs and Symptoms 
a. External bleeding 
1) Bleeding in spurts (arterial) 
2) Steady flow of blood (venous) 
3) Slow oozing of blood (capillary) 
b. Internal bleeding 
1) Coughing up bright red blood 
2) Vomit that has the appearance of coffee grounds 
3) Blood in urine or stool (stool may be black and tarry in 
appearance) 
 
 

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 9 of 24 
 
 
 
3. Nurse Assistant Role 
a. Remain calm, call for assistance loudly, and pull 
emergency call light 
b. Stay with patient/resident 
c. Observe standard precautions, wear gloves 
d. Apply direct pressure, with gauze pad, over area that is 
bleeding 
e. Elevate affected limb 
f. Do not offer food or drink 
g. Keep patient/resident calm and cover to keep warm 
H. Shock 
1. Failure of the cardiovascular system to provide sufficient 
blood circulation to every part of the body 
2. Signs and Symptoms 
a. Skin pale, cold and clammy, or moist 
b. Pulse rapid (over 100) and weak; low or falling blood 
pressure 
c. Respiration shallow, irregular, or labored 
d. Eyes dull and lackluster 
e. Nausea, vomiting, and/or thirst 
f. Confusion, anxiety, restlessness 
g. May collapse (faint) 
3. Nurse Assistant Role 
a. Remain calm, call for help loudly, and pull emergency call 
light 
b. Stay with patient/resident, give reassurance 
c. Maintain an open airway (head tilt-chin lift or modified chin 
lift) 
d. Do not give food or drink 
e. Cover patient/resident to keep warm 
I. Respiratory Distress 
1. Increase or decrease in the effort and frequency of breathing 
movements 
 

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 10 of 24 
 
 
 
2. Signs & Symptoms 
a. Shortness of breath (SOB) 
b. Cyanosis 
c. Dyspnea 
d. Hyper/Hypoventilation 
e. Hypoxia 
f. Bradypnea/Tachypnea 
g. Anxiety confusion 
3. Nursing Assistant Role 
a. Stay with patient/resident 
b. Elevate HOB, or allow patient/resident to assume 
position of comfort 
c. Remain calm, call for help and pull emergency call light 
d. Reassure/calm patient/resident 
e. Assess vital signs while awaiting assistance from licensed 
nurse 
f. Be prepared to gather equipment as instructed by nurse; 
i.e., oxygen tank and tubing 
 
Objective 3 
Describe the immediate interventions in a medical emergency. 
A. Advance directives 
1. Signed document with instructions for care if you become 
unable to make medical decisions (if you are in a coma, for 
example) 
2. Full code 
3. Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) 
4. Living will 
5. Durable Power of Attorney for Healthcare 
B. Immediate interventions 
1. Note that this is not a CPR course. The information is not 
intended to take the place of a CPR course 
2. American Heart Association is re-arranging the ABCs of 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) in its 2010 American 
Heart Association Guidelines 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
C. Review and practice 
CPR with manikins 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Responds to 
emergencies safely and 
per facility protocols 
C. Locates emergency 
equipment in facility 
 

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 11 of 24 
 
 
 
3. Perform CPR only if trained 
a. Check to see if patient/resident is conscious 
b. Circulation 
1) Check for circulation by feeling for a pulse, palpating 
the carotid artery 
2) If no definite pulse within 10 seconds, give chest 
compressions 
c. Airway 
1) Open the airway if patient/resident unconscious 
2) Use head tilt, chin lift or modified chin lift 
d. Breathing 
1) Check for breathing by looking, listening and feeling 
2) Give two full breaths using a barrier device (pocket 
mask) 
3) A mask must be used by the Nurse Assistant to do 
rescue breathing 
e. Circulation 
1) Check for circulation by feeling for a pulse, palpating 
the carotid artery 
2) If no definite pulse within ten seconds, give chest 
compressions 
f. Sequence; continue per current standards with 30 
compressions to 2 ventilations (30:2) 
C. General guidelines for a emergency situation with a patient/resident 
1. Stay calm 
2. Call for help – gain assistance of licensed nurse 
3. Charge nurse will initiate EMS system by calling 911 
4. Remain with patient/resident 
5. Intervene at level of competence as directed by licensed nurse 
6. Reassure/calm patient/resident 
7. Emergency/crash cart; knowing the location of the crash cart is 
mandatory at most facilities 
8. Automated External Defibrillator (AED) 
a. Be aware of AED location 
b. Chance of survival is greater with early defibrillation 
c. Must be trained to use defibrillators 
 
 
 

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 12 of 24 
 
 
 
Objective 4 
List the causes and signs of choking and discuss the use of the 
abdominal thrusts for relief of obstructed airway. 
A. Airway obstruction or choking can lead to cardiac arrest 
B. Causes 
1. Foreign body – such as poorly chewed pieces of meat 
2. Tongue – in the unconscious patient/resident the tongue 
can fall backward in the throat and block the airway 
3. Small objects 
4. Vomitus – aspiration of vomit 
5. Thick mucus 
6. Dentures 
C. Signs of choking 
1. Respiratory difficulty – victim cannot breathe 
2. High pitched sounds 
3. Inability to speak or cough 
4. Universal choking sign – victim clutches throat 
D. Abdominal thrusts (Heimlich maneuver) are used to relieve, 
obstructed airway in a conscious victim 
E. Chest compressions are used if the victim is unconscious and 
rescuer is unable to ventilate 
 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
C. Manual Skill 12.4: 
Choking victim- 
Conscious and 
Unconscious 
D. Practice abdominal 
thrusts on manikin- 
standing, sitting, and on 
floor 
E. May also be reviewed 
during Module 11- 
Feeding 
 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Recognizes universal 
sign for choking 
C. Demonstrates correct 
technique for abdominal 
thrusts for conscious 
and victim using 
manikin 
D. Responds to 
emergencies safely and 
per facility protocol 
Objective 5 
Describe common emergency codes used in long-term care 
facilities. 
A. Emergency code colors and meanings 
1. Code Red – fire 
2. Code Blue – adult medical emergency (Cardiac or 
Respiratory) 
3. Code Yellow –bomb threat 
4. Code Gray – combative person 
5. Code Silver – person with weapon or hostage 
6. Code Orange – hazardous waste spill or release 
B. Codes may vary according to facility 
C. Observe special consideration for hearing and sight impaired 
patients/residents 
 
 
 
A. Lecture 
B. Discussion 
 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Recognizes 
emergency codes in 
facility 

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 13 of 24 
 
 
Sample Test: Module 12 - Emergency Procedures 
 
1. Most communities have a common emergency telephone number that notifies the Emergency Medical Service (EMS). Which of 
the following numbers is the emergency number? 
A. 911 
B. 484 
C. 411 
D. 916 
 
2. Mr. Johnson has cut his hand on a broken piece of glass and is bleeding heavily. The Nurse Assistant should: 
A. Apply a circular strap around the wrist to act as a tourniquet 
B. Call 911, STAT (immediately) 
C. Have Mr. Johnson lower his hand below his heart to slow circulation to the site 
D. Apply direct pressure (with a gloved hand) using a pad, raising the hand above the level of the heart 
 
3. A patient/resident has epilepsy. In the event of a seizure, the Nurse Assistant should: 
A. Leave the patient/resident to summon help 
B. Protect the patient/resident from injury 
C. Force the patient’s/resident’s mouth open 
D. Call for help in order to restrain the patient’s/resident’s movements 
 
4. Which of the following best describes the “universal choking sign” given by the victim: 
A. Both hands clasped around his/her neck 
B. His/her arms waving up and down 
C. Pointing to his mouth with one hand 
D. The victim coughs and calls for help 
 
5. The Nurse Assistant discovers an unconscious victim on the floor in the hall. What action should the Nurse Assistant take first? 
A. Move the victim to his room 
B. Search the victim for any areas of bleeding 
C. Call for assistance, then open the victim’s airway and check for breathing 
D. Straighten out any obvious deformities in the victim’s arms & legs 

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 14 of 24 
 
 
 
6. Your patient/resident is complaining that he is having pains in his chest. He is sweating and breathing heavily. As the Nurse 
Assistant who is with the patient/resident, you should: 
A. Tell the patient/resident this happens to you when you eat spicy foods, also 
B. Stay with the patient/resident & call for the nurse in charge 
C. Begin CPR 
D. Tell the patient/resident that he is having a heart attack 
 
7. What procedure is done for a conscious choking patient/resident? 
A. Chest compressions 
B. Rescue breathing 
C. Abdominal thrusts 
D. Head tilt, chin lift 
 
8. Mr. D’s family is present when Mr. D has a seizure. Which of the following actions should the Nurse Assistant take for the family? 
A. Ask them to wait in a nearby room 
B. Tell them how you feel the patient’s/resident’s condition is doing 
C. Ask them to stay with the patient/resident as you get help 
D. Ask them to assist in holding the patient/resident down 
 
9. Which of the following might be most helpful in preventing choking? 
A. Have the patient/resident eat all his solid foods before liquids 
B. Cut foods, especially meat into small, bite size pieces 
C. Feed the patient/resident quickly to reduce the risk of choking 
D. Have the patient/resident stand while eating so it will go down better 
 
10. Which of the following are causes for hypoglycemia? 
A. Not enough insulin 
B. Decrease activity, vomiting, and undiagnosed diabetes 
C. Too much insulin, omitting a meal, vomiting 
D. Stress, increased activity 

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 15 of 24 
 
 
 
11. Which of the following might be a sign of an obstructed airway? 
A. Elevated temperature 
B. Pinpoint pupils 
C. Inability to speak 
D. Coughing 
 
12. When performing abdominal thrusts, place the fist in one hand: 
A. Just above the pubis and below the navel (belly button) 
B. On the neck 
C. Between the navel and end of the sternum (breast bone) 
D. Over the ribs 
 
13. Mrs. Harvey is complaining that her chest and arm hurt very badly. She is breathing heavily and sweating. While waiting for the 
nurse what should the Nurse Assistant do? 
A. Perform ROM on all extremities so patient/resident will not lose function of joints 
B. Give patient/resident oxygen 
C. Reassure patient/resident while putting her in a comfortable sitting position 
D. Leave to get emergency equipment in case you need it 
 
14. Mr. Jones is showing the following signs and symptoms: dizziness, headache, weakness on his right side, and aphasia. What 
could be the cause? 
A. Heart attack 
B. CVA 
C. Syncope 
D. Shock 
 
15. What personal protective equipment would be used when caring for a patient/resident with external bleeding? 
A. Gloves 
B. Goggles 
C. Gown 
D. All of the above 

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 16 of 24 
 
 
 
16. While ambulating Mrs. S, she has a fainting episode (syncope). What should the Nurse Assistant do first? 
A. Go get help 
B. Take Mrs. S’s vital signs 
C. Assist Mrs. S to the floor 
D. Get Mrs. S a glass of water 
 
17. Which of the following are signs and symptoms of internal bleeding? 
A. Bleeding in spurts 
B. Coffee ground vomit 
C. Normal appearance of urine 
D. Slow oozing of blood 
 
18. What is the Nurse Assistant’s role in caring for a patient/resident in shock? 
A. Keep patient/resident calm and warm 
B. Give water and ROM 
C. Maintain open airway and keep cool 
D. Keep active and fed 
 
19. DNR, Living Will and Durable Power of Attorney are examples of: 
A. Boundaries of Care 
B. Scope of Practice 
C. Advanced Directives 
D. Nursing plan 
 
20. CAB in reference to emergency care mean: 
A. Sequence of assessment 
B. Caring, Ambulation, Bathing 
C. Cycle, Airway, Bleeding 
D. Compressions, Airway, Breathing 

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 17 of 24 
 
 
 
21. Mr. G is coughing forcefully after swallowing a piece of meat. The Nurse Assistant should: 
A. Call for help 
B. Stay with Mr. G to monitor coughing 
C. Abdominal thrusts only if not coughing 
D. Give Mr. Gomez a glass of water 
 
22. While eating, a patient/resident suddenly clutches his throat. The Nurse Assistant should FIRST: 
A. Give the patient/resident back blows 
B. Have the patient/resident sip some water 
C. Ask the patient/resident if he is choking, call for help 
D. Do a finger sweep of the patient’s/resident’s mouth 
 
23. A patient/resident is choking and unable to speak. Which of the following actions should the Nurse Assistant take? 
A. Place the patient/resident in a chair 
B. Perform an arm lift 
C. Perform abdominal thrusts 
D. Administer sharp back blows 
 
24. AED delivers an electric shock to the heart. What is an AED? 
A. Automatic External Device 
B. Automated External Device 
C. Automatic External Defibrillator 
D. Automated Exit Defibrillator 
 
25. While eating, a patient/resident suddenly has a problem breathing but is able to say, “I’m choking” and is not coughing. Which 
of the following should the Nurse Assistant do? 
A. Administer abdominal thrusts 
B. Do a finger sweep of the patient’s/resident’s mouth 
C. Apply chest thrusts 
D. Give the patient/resident black blows 

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 18 of 24 
 
 
 
26. Mr. S has epilepsy and suffers from grand mal seizures. During a seizure it is important to: 
A. Restrain the patient/resident securely 
B. Attempt to keep the patient’s/resident’s jaws open 
C. Try to get the patient/resident to control his movements 
D. Protect the patient/resident from injury 
 
27. The Nurse Assistant finds a patient/resident having shortness of breath. The Nurse Assistant should do all of the following except: 
A. Keep calm 
B. Leave the patient 
C. Turn on the call light 
D. Call for help 
 
28. A patient/resident complains of chest pain. The Nurse Assistant should know that the patient/resident may possibly be having: 
A. An insulin reaction 
B. A stroke 
C. Arthritis 
D. A heart attack 

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 19 of 24 
 
 
 
 
Sample Test Answers: Module 12 
 
1. A 
2. D 
3. B 
4. A 
5. C 
6. B 
7. C 
8. A 
9. B 
10. C 
11. C 
12. C 
13. C 
14. B 
15. D 
16. C 
17. B 
18. A 
19. C 
20. D 
21. B 
22. C 
23. C 
24. C 
25. A 
26. D 
27. B 
28. D 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 20 of 24 
Module 12: Emergency Procedures Manual Skills 12.4- Abdominal Thrusts 
 
 
 
MANUAL SKILL: Abdominal Thrusts (Heimlich Maneuver) for the Conscious and Unconscious Patient/resident 
 
CONSCIOUS PATIENT/RESIDENT 
 
STEPS: 
 
1. Remain calm, call RN STAT, remain with patient/resident, and ask patient/resident if he/she is choking. 
2. Identify knowledge of first aid for choking. 
3. If the patient/resident can cough, continue to observe. 
4. If the patient/resident is sitting or standing, stand behind him/her. 
5. When the patient/resident cannot speak, cough, or breathe, apply abdominal thrusts: 
a. Wrap your arms around the patient’s/resident’s waist. 
b. Make a fist with one hand. 
c. Place the thumb side of your fist against the patient’s/resident’s abdomen – just below the lower end of the sternum and 
above the navel. 
d. Grasp the fist with the opposite hand. 
e. Using both hands, push forcefully with the thumb side of fist against the midline of the patient’s/resident’s abdomen, 
inward and upward with a quick trust. 
f. Repeat until the foreign body comes out or the patient/resident loses consciousness. 
g. When normal breathing returns, watch for several minutes to be sure that breathing continues. 

California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
 
Page 21 of 24 
Module 12: Emergency Procedures Manual Skills 12.4- Abdominal Thrusts 
 
 
 
UNCONSCIOUS PATIENT/RESIDENT 
 
EQUIPMENT: 
 
Gloves (if available) 
Ventilation device (i.e. ambu bag) 
Pocket mask (if available) 
 
STEPS: 
 
1. Call for help, but do not leave patient/resident. 
2. Lower patient/resident to floor and position on back. 
3. Apply gloves (if available), tilt head, open airway by pushing on forehead and lifting chin with fingertips. 
4. Try two slow breaths using pocket mask, or ambu bag (one breath every five seconds). 
5. Straddle patient’s/resident’s thighs. 
6. Place heel of one hand on patient’s/resident’s abdomen below the lower end of the sternum and above the navel, place second 
hand over first (fingers pointing toward head), give six to ten thrusts. 
7. Remove object if seen. 
8. Attempt to give breaths through pocket mask or ambu bag. 
9. If still obstructed repeat thrusts, checking for object and giving breaths until object is dislodged. 
10. Continue until airway is open, help arrives, or rescuer cannot continue. 

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
Module Curriculum for Nurse California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office 
Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
Page 23 of 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Across Down 
6 The heart or lungs stop. 1 Immediately. 
8 Protective gloves. 2 Difficult breathing 
11 A sudden threatening membranes. 3 Restlessness. 
13 Pale skin or mucous membranes. 4 Written Idea about what to do in case of a 
fire or disaster. 
15 Supports used to help prevent injury. 5 Unconscious. 
16 A bluish discoloration of the skin or mucous 
membranes. 
7 Too much insulin produced. 
17 Excessive perspiration. 9 A maneuver to help someone chocking. 
10 Abnormal bleeding. 
12 Someone having problems breathing has 
respiratory. 
14 Abbreviation for oxygen. 

Module 12: Emergency Procedures 
Module Curriculum for Nurse California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office 
Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 
Page 24 of 24