Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 1 of 14 
 
 
Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse 
Minimum Number of Theory Hours: 6 
Suggested Theory Hours: 7 
Recommended Clinical Hours: 0 
 
Statement of Purpose: 
The purpose of this unit is to introduce the Nurse Assistant to patient/resident abuse. The module will focus on the nurse assistant 
role in preventing, recognizing, and reporting instances of patient/resident abuse. 
 
Terminology: 
1. Abuse 
2. Advance Directive 
3. Aiding and abetting 
4. Assault 
5. Battery 
6. Choice 
7. Chronic 
8. Coercion 
9. Confidential 
10. Defamation 
11. Defamation of character 
12. Do Not Resuscitate (DNR)/ No 
Code 
13. Ethical standard 
14. False imprisonment 
15. Financial abuse 
16. Grievances 
17. HIPAA 
18. Informed consent 
19. Involuntary seclusion 
20. Laws 
21. Legal standard 
22. Libel 
23. Mandated reporter 
24. Neglect 
25. Negligence 
26. Ombudsman 
27. Physical abuse 
28. Policy and Procedure 
29. Privacy 
30. Psychological abuse 
31. Resident council 
32. Restraints 
33. Scope of practice 
34. Sexual abuse 
35. Slander 
36. Social services 
37. Theft 
38. Verbal abuse 
 
Patient, resident, and client are synonymous terms referring to the person receiving care 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance Standards (Objectives): 

Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 2 of 14 
 
Upon completion of the six (6) hours of class plus homework assignments and one (1) hour of clinical experience, the learner will be 
able to: 
1. Define key terminology 
2. Identify and discuss types of elder abuse 
3. Discuss the issues related to elder abuse 
4. Explain the Nurse Assistant role in preventing elder abuse 
5. Describe the Nurse Assistant role in reporting elder abuse 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References: 
1. Acello, B. & Hegner, B. (2016). Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage Learning. 

Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 3 of 14 
 
2. Acello, B. (2016). Workbook to accompany: Nursing Assistant: A Nursing Process Approach. (11th ed). Boston, MA. Cengage 
Learning 
3. Anetzberger, G. & Dayton, C. (2013) Elder Abuse Risk Factors Podcast Part 1 located at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0m_4_yzsMcU&feature=youtu.be 
4. California Code of Regulations, Division 5, Chapter S1, Title 22. Statement of Resident Rights. Section 72527 
5. CA Attorney General’s publications available at www.safestates.org/page/publications 
6. California Health and Safety Code, Sections 1599.1, 1599.2, 1599.3 http://www.search-california-
law.com/research/section/ca/HSC/4.25/index.html 
7. Caregiver training videos on elder abuse available from www.training.mmlearnorg. 
8. Carter, P. J. (2017). Lippincott Essentials for Nursing Assistants: a Humanistic Approach to Caregiving. (4th ed.) Philadelphia, 
PA. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 
9. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 42, 483.1, 483.12, 483.13, 483.15 https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2017-title42-
vol5/xml/CFR-2017-title42-vol5-part483.xml 
10. Deck, M. L. (2004). Instant Teaching Tools for the New Millennium. St Louis, MO. Mosby 
11. Hartman Publishing. (2018). Workbook for Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque, NM. 
Hartman Publishing, Inc. 
12. Haroun, L. & Royce, S. (2004). Teaching Ideas and Activities for Health Care. Albany, NY. Delmar Publishers 
13. HIPAA Regulations (2005) https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/index.html 
14. Hedman, S. A., Fuzy, J., & Rymer, S. (2018). Hartman's Nursing Assistant Care: Long-Term Care (4th ed.). Albuquerque, 
NM. Hartman Publishing, Inc. 
15. Pearson Vue (2018) California Nurse Assistant Candidate Handbook for National Nurse Aide Assessment Program. 
Philadelphia, PA. Pearson Education, Inc. 
16. Resident Abuse and Exploitation Prevention and Protection video productions with facilitator guide available from 
www.videoproproduction.com
 
17. Sorrentino, S. A., Remmert, L., & and Kelly, R. (2018) Workbook and Competency Evaluation Review for Moby’s Textbook for 
Nursing Assistants (9th ed.) St. Louis, MO. Mosby Company. 
18. Sorrentino, S.A. and Remmert, L. (2018) Mosby’s Textbook for Nursing Assistants. (9th ed.). St Louis, MO. Elsevier. 
19. Weaver, L. & Wilding, M. (2013) The Dimensions of Engaged Teaching: a Practical Guide for Educators. Bloomington, IN. 
Solution Tree Press. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 4 of 14 
 
 
Content Outline 
Recommended Teaching 
Strategies and 
Assignments 
Clinical Demonstration/ 
Method of Evaluation 
Objective 1 
Define key terminology 
A. Review the terms listed in the terminology section. 
B. Spell the listed terms accurately. 
C. Pronounce the terms correctly. 
D. Use the terms in their proper context. 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Games: word searches, 
crossword puzzles, 
Family Feud, Jeopardy, 
bingo, spelling bee, 
hangman, and 
concentration. 
C. Encourage use of 
internet, medical 
dictionary, and 
textbooks. 
D. Create flashcards. 
 
 
A. Have students select 
five words from the list 
of key terminology and 
write a sentence for 
each defining the term. 
B. Administer vocabulary 
pre-test and post-test. 
C. Uses appropriate 
terminology when 
charting and reporting to 
licensed personnel. 
Objective 2 
Identify and discuss types of elder abuse 
A. Define Abuse 
1. An intentional act or failure to act by a caregiver or another 
person in a relationship involving an expectation of trust 
that causes or creates a risk of harm to an older adult who 
is someone age 60 or older 
2. A crime and is one or more of the following elements: 
1) Willful causing of injury 
2) Unreasonable confinement 
3) Intimidation, making someone afraid 
4) Punishment 
5) Refusal of goods or services needed for physical, 
mental or psychological well-being 
3. Can happen to any older person, but often affects those 
who depend on others for help with activities of everyday 
life 
4. Likely targets are older people who have no family or 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Arrange for tour of a 
long term care facility. 
C. Arrange for a guest 
speaker from a long 
term care facility. 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Class participation 

Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 5 of 14 
 
friends nearby and people with disabilities, memory 
problems, cognitive problems, or dementia 
B. Forms or types of Elder Abuse (National Institute of Aging): 
1. Verbal 
1) Teasing 
2) Profanity 
3) Racial slanders 
4) Threats 
2. Physical 
1) Battery: kicking, biting, hitting, shoving, pulling hair 
2) Rough handling 
3. Psychological (Emotional abuse) 
1) Ridiculing or saying hurtful words 
2) Ignoring repeatedly 
3) Manipulating 
4) Yelling at or threatening 
4. Involuntary seclusion 
1) Isolation 
2) Keeping that person from seeing close friends and 
relatives 
5. Abandonment 
1) Leaving someone unattended 
2) No planning for patient’s/resident’s care 
6. Neglect 
1) Failure to provide care that a reasonable person would 
provide 
2) Not answering call light 
3) Smells of urine and not being cleaned/changed 
7. Sexual 
1) Overtures or Innuendos 
2) Inappropriate gestures 
3) Inappropriate touching 
4) Forcing an older adult to watch or be part of sexual 
acts 
8. Financial 
1) Stealing money or borrowing items 

Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 6 of 14 
 
2) Accepting gifts 
3) May include forging checks, taking someone else's 
retirement and Social Security benefits, using another 
person's credit cards and bank accounts, changing 
names on a will, bank account, life insurance policy, or 
title to a house without permission from the older 
person 
9. Healthcare Fraud 
1) Overcharging 
2) Billing twice for the same service 
3) Falsifying Medicaid or Medicare claims 
4) Charging for care that was not provided 
5) Committed by healthcare providers or hospital staff 
C. Signs and Symptoms of abuse 
1. Has new onset sleeping problems 
2. Seems depressed or confused 
3. Loses weight for no reason 
4. Displays signs of trauma, like rocking back and forth 
5. Acts agitated or violent 
6. Becomes withdrawn 
7. Stops taking part in activities that the patient/resident 
previously liked 
8. Has unexplained bruises, burns, or scars 
9. Appears unkempt or messy with unwashed hair or dirty 
clothes 
10. Develops bed sores or other preventable conditions 
 
Objective 3: 
Discuss the issues related to elder abuse 
A. Abuse is a crime and is one or more of the following elements: 
1. Willful causing of injury. 
2. Unreasonable confinement. 
3. Intimidation, making someone afraid. 
4. Punishment. 
5. Refusal of goods or services needed for physical, 
mental or psychological well-being. 
 
 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Handout 2.5- Abuse 
Reporting Form- SOC 
341 
C. Video “Your Legal 
Duty: Reporting Elder 
and Dependent Adult 
Abuse” Fax requests 
 
 
A. Written test 
B. Class participation 

Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 7 of 14 
 
B. Elder abuse has been: 
1. Poorly or imprecisely defined 
2. Defined specifically to reflect the unique statutes or conditions 
present in specific states, counties, or cities 
3. Defined specifically for research purposes 
C. All states require the reporting of elder abuse or child abuse 
D. Forms of elder abuse (refer to objective 2) 
1. Physical abuse 
2. Verbal abuse 
3. Involuntary seclusion 
4. Financial abuse 
5. Psychological abuse (emotional/mental abuse) 
5. Sexual abuse 
6. Neglect 
7. Abandonment 
8. Healthcare Fraud 
D. Recognizing the evidence and observation of elder abuse 
1. Living conditions are unsafe, unclean or inadequate 
2. Personal hygiene is lacking. 
3. Weight loss 
4. Frequent injuries 
5. Old bruises 
6. Quiet and withdrawn attitude 
7. Anxious to please caregiver 
8. Private conversations not allowed 
9. Medications not taken properly 
10. Frequent Visits to ER, hospital, or clinics 
11. May go from one doctor to another 
E. Evaluate how a series of actions and reactions might lead to 
abuse 
F. Define local, state, and federal regulations regarding abuse 
(mandated reporter) 
to Bureau of Medi-Cal 
Fraud and Elder 
Abuse. FAX: 916- 
263-2565. 
Downloadable 
publications from CA 
Attorney General’s 
office available at 
www.safestate.org/publ
i cations 
D. Bureau of Medi-Cal 
Fraud and Elder 
Abuse 
http://ag.ca.gov/bmfea/
el der.php 
Objective 4: 
Explain the Nurse Assistant role in recognizing and preventing 
elder abuse 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 8 of 14 
 
A. Explain the difference between negligence and abuse 
B. Recognize the evidence of elder abuse 
1. Living conditions are unsafe, unclean or inadequate. 
2. Personal hygiene is lacking. 
3. Weight loss 
4. Frequent injuries 
5. Old bruises 
6. Quiet and withdrawn attitude 
7. Anxious to please caregiver 
8. Private conversations not allowed 
9. Medications not taken properly 
10. Frequent Visits to ER, hospital, or clinics 
11. May go from one doctor to another 
C. Explain Nurse Assistant role in preventing abuse 
1. Identify combination of individual, relational, community, and 
societal factors contribute to the risk of abuse 
2. Current diagnosis of mental illness 
3. Current abuse of alcohol 
4. High levels of hostility 
5. Poor or inadequate preparation or training for care giving 
responsibilities 
6. Assumption of caregiving responsibilities at an early age 
7. Inadequate coping skills 
8. Exposure to abuse as a child 
9. High financial and emotional dependence upon a vulnerable 
elder 
10. Lack of support 
11. Unsympathetic or negative attitudes toward patients/residents 
12. Chronic staffing problems 
13. Lack of administrative oversight, staff burnout, and stressful 
working conditions 
D. Identify patient/resident safety and abuse prevention techniques 
1. Effective monitoring systems 
2. Institutional policies and procedures regarding patient care 
3. Training on elder abuse and neglect for employees 
4. Education and clear guidance on durable power of attorney 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Locate facility policies 
and procedures and 
patient/resident rights 
documents. 
C. Role-play a situation that 
involves a threat to 
patient/resident rights 
 
A. Written test 
B. Class participation 
C. Locate facility policies, 
procedures, and 
patient/resident rights 
documents. 
D. Consistently promotes 
patient/resident rights 

Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 9 of 14 
 
and how it is to be used 
5. Promoting regular visits by family members, volunteers, and 
social workers 
6. Coordination of resources and services among community 
agencies and organizations 
E. Explain how to prevent violations of elder abuse and discuss 
techniques to rectify situations that could possibly lead to abuse 
1. Provide services to relieve the burden of caregiving, such as 
housekeeping and meal preparation, respite care, education, 
support groups, and day care 
2. Estate planning including 
a. Living will 
b. Revocable trust 
c. Durable power of attorney for healthcare and/or asset 
management 
3. Not signing documents without first consulting an attorney or 
family member you trust 
4. Not provide personal information (e.g. social security number, 
credit card) 
5. Tear up or shred credit card receipts, bank statements, and 
financial records before disposing of them 
6. If you hire someone for personal assistance services, in home 
care services, etc. ensure that they have been properly 
screened with criminal background checks completed 
F. Review Mandated Reporter Role 
1. Define facility, state, and federal policies and procedures 
related elder abuse 
G. Identify Self-care Techniques (Caregiver) 
1. Caregiver may need to be available around the clock to fix 
meals, provide nursing care, take care of laundry and 
cleaning, drive to doctors' appointments, and pay bills, which 
contributes to caregiver stress 
2. Make sure you have time to rest and take care of your needs 
3. Ask a family member or friend to help out for a weekend, or 
even for a few hours, so that you can take some time for 
yourself 

Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 10 of 14 
 
4. ARCH National Respite Network and Resource 
Center's National Respite Locator to find respite services in 
your area 
5. Caregiving support groups may also help 
6. Exercise could even help with stress 
H. Identify and discuss specific techniques for preventing escalation 
of potential abuse situations 
Objective 5: 
Describe the Nurse Assistant role in reporting elder abuse 
and/or patients’/residents’ rights violations 
A. Review types of elder abuse and/or patients’/residents’ rights 
violations (refer to objective 2 &3) 
B. Reporting 
1. Discuss your observations with a licensed nurse and/or other 
appropriate personnel 
1) If Nurse Assistant observes the abuse incident, the 
Nurse Assistant is responsible for reporting; mandated 
reporter 
2) LVN or RN may assist the Nurse Assistant in completing 
mandated forms and in submitting required forms to 
reporting agencies 
2. Report observations as a mandated reporter, following federal 
mandate for reporting suspected or actual elder abuse and/or 
patients’/residents’ rights violations 
3. Follow agency policies regarding abuse reporting 
4. Follow up on reported incident with licensed personnel 
5. Reporting Resources 
1) Adult Protective Services (APS) 
2) Long-Term Care Ombudsmen 
3) Eldercare Locator 
4) National Center on Elder Abuse (NCEA) 
A. Lecture/Discussion 
B. Handout 2.5- 
Abuse Reporting 
Form- SOC 341. 
C. Video “Your Legal 
Duty: Reporting Elder 
and Dependant Adult 
Abuse” Fax requests 
to Bureau of Medi-
Cal Fraud and Elder 
Abuse. FAX: 916- 
263-2565. 
Downloadable 
publications from CA 
Attorney General’s 
office available at 
www.safestate.org/pu
bli cations 
D. Bureau of Medi-Cal 
Fraud and Elder 
Abuse 
http://ag.ca.gov/bmfea
/el der.php 
E. Red Flags of Abuse 
located at 
https://ncea.acl.gov/N
CEA/media/docs/Red-
Flags-of-Elder-Abuse-
English.pdf 
A. Written test 
B. Class participation 

Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 11 of 14 
 
Sample Test: Module 17 Elder Abuse 
 
1. The following statements about abuse are true except: 
a. Abuse is making judgements before knowing the patient/resident situation. 
b. Abuse is a punishable crime. 
c. Abuse is a willful act that causes harm or injury to the patient/resident. 
d. Abuse is depriving a person of goods and services needed to maintain health. 
 
2. Threatening to touch the person’s body without the person’s consent is: 
a. Assault 
b. Battery 
c. Defamation 
d. False Imprisonment 
 
3. Restraining a person’s movement is: 
a. Neglect 
b. Invasion of privacy 
c. Defamation 
d. False Imprisonment 
 
4. Sharing a person’s photos on a social media site is: 
a. Fraud 
b. Allowed with the family’s consent 
c. A HIPAA Violation 
d. Allowed if you obtained consent 
 
5. Who is most at risk for being wounded, attacked, or assaulted? 
a. A teenager 
b. A single mother 
c. A caregiver 
d. An older adult 
 

Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 12 of 14 
 
6. You scold an older person for not eating their dinner. This is a form of: 
a. Physical abuse 
b. Neglect 
c. Battery 
d. Verbal abuse 
 
7. You leave your patient before completing your assignment and the patient’s/resident’s care. This is abuse by: 
a. Abandonment 
b. Neglect 
c. Involuntary seclusion 
d. Battery 
 
8. You fall asleep at work. This is: 
a. Abandonment 
b. Neglect 
c. Malpractice 
d. Emotional abuse 
 
9. Which is a sign of elder abuse? 
a. Stiff joints and joint pain 
b. Weight gain 
c. Poor personal hygiene 
d. Forgetfulness 
 
10. An older adult has a black eye, bruises on their face, bite marks on on their arms. These are signs of: 
a. Physical abuse 
b. Sexual abuse 
c. Neglect 
d. Verbal abuse 
 
11. You suspect a patient/resident has been abused. What should you do? 
a. Tell the nurse 

Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 13 of 14 
 
b. Call the police 
c. Tell the family 
d. Ask the person about the abuse 
 
12. Failure to exercise the degree of care considered reasonable in a given situation is: 
a. Malpractice 
b. Neglect, 
c. Coercion 
d. Physical abuse 
 
13. You overhear another nurse assistant raise their voice loudly in a threatening manner when speaking to their patient/resident. 
The nurse assistant is guilty of: 
a. Neglect 
b. Physical abuse 
c. Verbal abuse 
d. Invasion of privacy 
 
14. Your patient/resident offers you a dollar to thank you for picking up a newspaper for him. Your best response would be to: 
a. Ignore the money and pretend not to see it 
b. Take the money as you earned it 
c. Report the event to the doctor 
d. Politely refuse because tipping is not allowed 
 
15. T F A patient may not refuse any treatment prescribed by the doctor 
16. T F Every patient/resident has the right to considerate and respectful care 
17. T F Anxiety can make a patient/resident very demanding 
18. T F You fail to follow an order to encourage fluids for your patient/resident. You are guilty of neglect. 
19. T F If an error occurs as the nurse assistant gives care, the nurse assistant should report it when they think about it 
20. T F A patient/resident gives up their right to privacy when they are admitted to a healthcare facility 
 
 
 

Module 17: Patient/Resident Abuse 
 
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office Nurse Assistant Model Curriculum - Revised December 2018 Page 14 of 14 
 
Sample Test Answer Key: Module 17 Elder Abuse 
1. A 
2. A 
3. D 
4. C 
5. D 
6. D 
7. A 
8. A 
9. C 
10. A 
11. A 
12. B 
13. C 
14. D 
15. F 
16. T 
17. T 
18. T 
19. F 
20. F